Sa + hi ihe 2 Oe hae | 


meg, 





PETRARCH 

TRANSLATED; 

IN A 
SELECT LUN 
OF HIS 
SONNETS. AND ODES: 
ACCOMPANIED WITH 
NOTES, AND THE ORIGINAL ITALIAN; 
ALSO WITH 


THE HEAD OF PETRARCH FROM AN ANTIQUE BRON 


Donec erunt ignes, arcusque Cupidinis arma, &c. 
OVID, 





Peinted by I. Pople, 
22, Qa Bestecdi € 0urt, Strand, 





DEDICATION. 





To RICHARD HEBER, Esquire. 


Your eminent acquirements 
in every branch of polite literature, and 
distinguished reputation, will exempt me 
from all suspicion of flattery, when I con- 
fess myself proud im beme permitted to in- 


scribe to you this little Volume. 


I sincercly wish its merit were 
such as might justly entitle it to your re- 
gard: I trust, however, it will be accepted 
as a’proof of the high esteem I bear your 
character; in which I know not whether to 


admire most, the correctness of your taste, 


DEDICATION. 


and the extensiveness of vour eruditior 
that generous ardour, and liberality of 

rit, which dead) vou to encotraee e 
attempt towards enlaruing the bounds, 

facilitating the attainment of knowledgc 
I am, 

Sir, 


Your very faithful and obliged servant, 


THE TRANSLATPO 


August 1, 1808. 


A Prapse of Petrarcke, and of PWauva hig ladte. 


Soncs and SonNETS of vcncertaine luctors ; 


SUBIOINED TO THE POEMS OF HENRY HOWARD EARL OF 
SURREY, AND OF SER THOMAS WYAT THE ELDER. 


RICHARD TOVTRL Ss DIT. L5O57. 


@ jerrarcke, bed and prince of ports al 
Chihose {iocip aift of Totming efaquence 
THcl map toc scitc, bue finde not how, or tobence, 
®o rare a gift with thee DID rise and fal, 

cace to thy bones, and glorp unmortall 
We to chp name, andto Her excellence, 
CCibose beauty lighted in thy nm and sence, 
So to be set forth as nonce other shall. 

OMby bath nat our pens rim7s 90 parfit turevgbte, 
SMe toby cur time forth Eringerh beauty such ? 
Co trpe our tittes as gofoc is by the touche, 

Tf to the stile the matter ded oughe ! 

But ther toas never Laure more chen one, 


sind ber bad jpetrarcke for Dis paragone. 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


Bevorr T exhibit what would appear to me some 
of the most beautiful, and certamly some of the 
most esteemed Sonnets, and Odes of Petrarch, both 
me their orginal form, and nan bnglish dress 3 it 
may not be unpertinent to remark, that hitherto the 
celebrity of the Great Tuscan has, with the ge- 
nerality of his readers at least, rested entircly on 
his amorous, and poetical compositions: these, in 
Ttatian, consist of 317 Sonnets ; 49 Odes (CAN ZON 1, 
some of which are denominated SesTIN EF, BALLATE, 
oy Mapricarty) and 0 Poems entitled Triumphs, 
0, Peégcants, most of them dreided into Parts (Ca- 
piToLt). but it ought to be understood, that 
they form a cery inconsiderable, and, m= one 
point of view, not the most meritorious part of 
b 


x ADVERTISEMENT. 


his works. Petrarch was one of the first moral 

philosophers, that any age has produced: and 

the revival of letters owes as much to his taste, 

genius, and industry, as to those of any other indivt- 

dual literature has to boast. This will be in a@ 

great measure evident from a list of his works, 

which to the curious reader may not proce unac- 

ceptable, cxtracted from the Basil edition of 1581, 

in folio. 

1. Of the Remedics against good, and bad For- 
tune: II Books, 

2. Of Solitary Life: 11 Booxs. 

3. Of the Leisure of Monastic Persons : 1 Boos. 

4. Of True Wisdom: 1 Diarocvrs. 

5. Of Contempt of the World: WW Diatocuss. 

6. On the Seven Penitential Psalms. 

7. Concerning the best Administration of Govern- 
ment, 

8. On the Duties, and Virtues of Commanders. 

9. Of memorable Things: 1V Booxs. 

10. An abridgement of the Lives of illustrious 

Men. 

11. An Ewhortation to restore Peace to Italy. 

12. An Oration to the ancient Defenders of the 
Roman State. 

15. An Echoriation to attempt the recovery of 
Liberty. 


14. 


15. 


1A 


17 
18. 


ADVERTISEMENT. x1 


Concerning the Fidelity, and Obedience of 
Wives 

Of the shunning Avarice. 

An Itinerary to the Holy Land. 

Letters on his own Affairs: VIII Booxs. 

to some of the most illustrious of the 

Ancients : I Boox. 

without any address: I Boox. 

concerning his affuirs in his old Age: 

XVI Books. 

on Various Subjects: I Boox. 














. On Ignorance both of one’s ownself, and others. 
. A Reply to the Invective of an anonymous 


Frenchman. 


. An Invective against a certain Physician: 


IV Books. 
Letters relative to his obtaining the Laurel. 


Petrarch wrote in Latin verse: 


1. Pastoral Eclogues. 
9. Africa, an Heroic Poem on the Carthaginian 


War: XII Books, 


3. Epistles: II Books. 


Besides what are published, there are extant in 


several libraries in Italy, and in the national li- 
brary at Paris, in manuscript, many small Tracts, 
and a great number of Letters addresseu’ by Pe- 


XU ADVERTISEMENT. 


trarch to the most eminent characters of his times ; 
which are descrived, by those who have consulted 
them, as highly curious, and interesting. Nothing 
is more called jor, or would prove more acceptable, 
than a complete, and correct edition of Pctrarch’s 
Latin works. Of the existing editions, that of 
1501, by Semon de Luere, and that of Alarco Ori- 
gono, 1516 (dated by mistake 1416) both printed 
at Vence, are considered the best. The two Basil 
editions of 1554, and 1581, though the most com- 
mon, are by far the worst: in many places, the 
typogrraphical errors render entire passages iner- 
plicable, 


SONNETS, AND ODES. 


SONETTI, E CANZONI 


DI 


PETRARCA. 


SONETTO I. 
l. 

Vor ch’ ascoltate in rime sparse wl suono 
Di quei sospiri ond’ io nudriva il core 
In sul mio primo giovenile errore, 
Quand era in parte altr’ uom da quel ch’ v sono; 

Del vario stile, in ch’ io piango, e ragiono 
Fra le cane speranze, el can dolore ; 
Ove sia chi per prova intenda amore, 
Spero trocar pieta, non che perdono. 

Na ben veggr or, st come al popol tutte 
Favola fui gran tempo ; onde sovente 
Di me medesmo ineco mi vergogno : 

E del mio vaneggiar vergogna é'l frutto, 
E''l pentirsi, e’l conoscer chiaramente, 


Che quanto piace al mondo ¢ breve sogno. 


SONNETS, AND ODES 


OF 


PETRARCH. 


SONNET TI. 


O YE, who list in scatter'd verse the sound 
Of all those sighs with which my heart I fed, 
What time by youthful crror first misled, 
When [ unlike the present man was found ; 

Who list the plaints, the reas’nings that abound | 
Throughout my song, by hopes, and vain gricfs bred | 
If cer true Jove its influence o’er ye shed, 
O let your pity be with pardon crown’d ! 

But now full well I see how to the crowd 
For length of time I prov'd a public jest: 
E’en by myself my folly is allow’d: 

And of my vanity the fruit is shame, 
Repentance, and a knowledge strong imprest, 
That worldly pleasure is a passing dream. 


B 2 


SONETTO II. 
2. 


Per far una leggiadra sua vendetta, 
E punir in un di ben mille offese, 
Celatamente Amor C arco riprese, 
Com uom ch’ a nocer luogo, e tempo aspetta. 

Era la ma virtute al cor ristretta, 

Per far ivi, ene gli occhi sue difese ; 
Quando ’l colpo mortal laggiu discese 
Ove solea spuntarsi ogni saetta. 
Pero turbata nel primiero assalto, 
Non ebbe tanto né vigor, né spazio, 
Che potesse al bisogno prender  arme ; 
Ovvero al poggio faticoso, ed alto 
Ritrarmi accortamente dallo strazio ; 


Del gual oggi vorrebbe, ¢ non pud aitarme. 


SONNET II. 


For many a crime at once to make me smart, 
And a delicious vengeance to obtain, 
Love secretly took up his bow again, 
As one who acts the cunning coward’s part ; 
My courage had retir'd within my heart, 
There to defend the pass bright eyes might gain; 
When his dread archery was pour'd amain 
Where blunted erst had fallen ev'ry dart. 
Scar’d at the sudden brisk attack, 1 found 
Nor time, nor vigour to repel the foe 
With weapons suited to the direful need ; 
No kind protection of rough rising ground, 
Where from defeat I might securely speed, 


Which fain I would een now, but ah, no method know ! 


SONETTO ITI. 
re 


Lis gola, e’l sonno, ¢ 0 oziose piume 
Hanno del mondo ogni virtu sbandita, 
Ond é dal corso suo quast smarrita 
Nostra natura vinta dal costume : 

Ed 0's} spento ogni benigno lume 
Del ciel, per cui s informa umana vita ; 
Che pcr cosa mirabile s’ addita, 

Chi cuol far d Elicona nascer frume. 

Qual caghesza di lauro? qual di mirto ? 
Povera, e nuda vai, Filosofia, 

Dice la turba al vil guadagno intesa. 

Pochi compagm acrai per 0 altra via; 
Li anto ti prego put, gentile spirto, 


Non lassar la magnanima tua impresa. 


SONNET III. 


Inremp’rance, slumber, and the slothful down 
Have chas‘d each virtue from this world away; 
Hence is our nature nearly led astray 
From its due course, by habitude o’erthrown: 

Those kindly lights of heav’n so dim are grown, 
Which shed o'er human life instruction’s ray ; 
That him with scornful wonder they survey, 
Who would draw forth the stream of Helicon. 

‘* Whom doth the laurel please, or myrtle now fr 
“© Naked and poor, Philosophy, art thou !” 
The worthless crowd, intent on lucre, cries. 

Few on thy chosen road will thee attend ; 

Yet let it more incite thee, gentle friend, 


To prosecute thy high-conceiv’d emprise. 


SONETTO IV. 
8. 


A pir de colli, ove la bella vesta 
Prese delle terrene membra pria 
La donna, che colui ch a te ne ’nvia, 
Spesso dal sonno lagrimando desta : 
Libere in pace passavam per questa 
Vita mortal, ch’ ogni animal desia, 
Senza sospetto di trovar fra via 
Cosa ch’ al nostr’ andar fosse molesta. 
Ma del misero stato ove noi semo 
Condotte dalla vita altra serena, 
Un sol conforto, e della morte, avemo: 
Che vendetta é di lui ch’ a cid ne mena; 
Lo qual in forza altrui, presso all estremo, 


Riman légato con maggior catena, 


SONNET IV. 


Beweatu those very hills, where beauty threw 
Her mantle first o'er that earth-moulded fair, 
Who oft from sleep, while shedding many a tear, 
Awakens him that sends us unto you, 

Our lives in peacefulness and freedom flew, 

F’en as all creatures wish who hold life dear ; 

Nor deem d we aught could in its course come near, 
Whence to our wandrings danger might accrue. 
But from the wretched state to which we ’re brought, 

Leaving another with sereneness fraught, 
Nay, een from death, one comfort we obtain ; 

That vengeance follows hin who sent us here ; 

Another's utmost thraldom doom d to bear, 


Bound he now lies with a still stronger chain.’ 


10 


CANZONE I. 


I, 


Lassans il velo 0 per sole, o per ombra, 
Donna, non vi vid’ 10, 
Poi, che’n me conosceste il gran desio, 
Chv ogni altra voglia dentr’al cor mi sgombra. 
Mentr’ io portava t be’ pensier celatt, 
C’ hanno la mente desiando morta, 
Vidret di pietate ornare il volto: 
Ma poi, ch’ Amor di me vi fece accorta, 
Fur’ 1 biondi capelli allor velati, 
‘EP amoroso sguardo in se raccolto. 
Quel, che piu desiava in voi, m é tolto ; 
Si mi governa il velo, 
Che per mia morte ed al caldo, ed al gielo, 


De be vostr’ occhi il dolce lume adombra. 


11 


ODE IT. 


W uereronre, my unkind fatr-one, say, 
Whether the sun fierce darts his ray, 
Or whether gloom o’erspreads the sky, 
That envious veil is ne'er thrown by ; 
Though well you read my heart, and knew 
Hfow much I long’d your charms to view ? 
While I conceal’d each tender thought, 
That my fond mind’s destruction wrought, 
Your face with pity sweetly shone ; 
But, when Love made my passion known, 
Your sunny locks were seen no more, 
Nor suul’d your cyes as heretofore ; 
Behind a jealous cloud retir’d 
Those beauties which I most admir’d. 

And shall a veil thus rule my fate ? 
QO, cruel veil, that whether heat, 
Or cold be felt, art doom’d to prove 


Fatal to me, shadowing the lights I love ! 


12 


SONETTO VF. 
1 


Sz la mia vita dalf aspro tormento 

Si pud tanto schermire, e dagl affanni, 

Ch ? veggia per virtu degli ultim’ anni, 

Donna, de’ be vostr’ occhi il lume spento: 
E i cape @ oro fin farsi @ argento, 

E lassar le ghirlande, e i verdi panni, 

El viso scolorir che ne’ miei danni 

A lamentar mi fa pauroso, e lento: 
Pur mi dara tanta baldanza Amore, 

Ch’ ? vi discovriro de’ miei martiri 

Qua’ sono stati gl anni, ei giorni, eT ore: 
E se’l tempo é contrario at be’ desirt ; 

Non fia, ch’ almen non giunga al mio dolore 


© 
Alcun soccorso di tardi sospiri. 


13 


SONNET V. 


My life, sweet lady, could I but maintain 
Free from all rig’rous torment, and from care, 
That I might view through each declining year 
Your beauteous eyes no longer bright remain ; 
Your locks of fine gold silver whiteness gain ; 
Those gay-green robes, the wreaths you wont to wear 
Thrown by; and, ah, faded that face so fair, 
Which makes me slow, and fearful to complain ! 
Love then at least such daring should inspire, 
That of the suff’rings I’ve been doom’d to feel 
The years, days, hours I might to you reveal. 
And, though the period suit not fond desire, 
Yet the soft griefs that in my bosom rise 
Still may she mitigate with tardy sighs. 


14 


SONETTO VFI. 


18. 


V ercoenanpo talor, ch’ ancor si taccia, 
Donna, per me vostra bellezza in rima, 
Ricorro al tempo, ch’ ? vi vidi prima, 
Tal che null’ altra fia mat che mt piaccia. 

Ma trovo peso non dalle mire braccia, 

Né ovra da polir con la mia lima : 
Pero lV ingegno, che sua forza estina, 
Nell operazion tutto s agghiaccia, 
Piu volte gia per dir le labbra apersi; 
Pot rimase la voce in mezzo ‘l petto. 
Ma qual suon poria mai salir tant’ alto? 

Piu volte incominciai di scriver versi : 

Ma la penna, c la mano, eC intelletio 


& 
Rimaser vinti nel primer’ assalto. 


15 


SONNET VI. 


Asuam’p sometimes thy beauties should remain 
As yet unsung, sweet lady, in my rhyme ; 
When first I saw thee I recall the time, 
Pleasing as none shall ever please again. 

But no fit polish can my verse attain, 

Not inine 1s strength to try the task sublime: 
My genius, measuring its pow'r to climb, 
From such attempt doth prudently refrain. 

Full oft I op'd my lips to chant thy name ; 
Then in mid utterance the lay was lost : 

But say what muse can dare so bold a flight ? 

Full oft I strove in measure to endite ; 

But ah, the pen, the hand, the vein I boast 


@ 
At once were vanquish'd by the mighty theme! 


16 


SONETTO VII. 
19. 


Mitte fiate, o dolce mia guerrera, 
Per aver co begli occhi vostri pace, 
V’ aggio profferto il cor: m’ a voi non piace 
Mirar si basso con la mente altera: 
E se di lui fors altra donna spera ; 
Vive in speranza debile, e fallace: 
Mio, perché sdegno cid ch’ a voi dispiace, 
Esser non puod giammai cosi, com’ era. 
Or s’ io lo scaccio, ed e& non trova in voi 
Nell essilio infelice alcun soccorso, 
Ne sa star sol, née gire ov’ altr’ il chiama ; 
Porria smarrire il suo natural corso ; 
Che grave colpa fia d’ ambeduo noi, 
C 


£ tanto pit di 00%, quanto pik v’ ama. 


17 


SONNET VII. 


A rnovusann times, sweet warriour, to obtain 
Peace with those beauteous eyes I’ve vainly tried, 
Proff'ring my heart; but with that lofty pride 
To bend your looks so lowly you refrain : 

Expects a stranger fair that heart to gain ; 

In frail, fallacious hopes will she confide : 
It never more to me can be allied ; 
Since what you scorn, dear lady, I disdain. 

In its sad exile if no aid you lend, 

Banish'd by me; and it can neither stay 
Alone, nor yet another's call obey ; 

Ats vital course must hasten to its end : 

Ah me, how guilty then we both should prove, 
But guilty you the most, for you it most doth love! 


18 


CANZONE I]. 
3. 


A quatunouve animale alberga in terra; 
Se non se alguanti c’ hanno in odio i sole ; 
Tempo da tracagliare é quanto él giorno: 
Ma poi, ch’ il ciel accende le sue stelle, 
Qual torna a casa, e qual s annida in selva 


Per acer posa alméno infin’ all alba. 


Ed to da che comincia la bell alba 
A scuoter [ ombra intorno della terra, 
Sveglando gli animali in ogni selva, 
Non ho mai triegua di sospir col sole. 
Poi, quand io veggio fiammeggiar le stelle, 


Vo lagrimando, e desiando il giorno. 


19 


ODE Il. 


Eacn creature, on whose wakeful eyes 
The bright sun pours his golden fire, 
By day a destin’d toil pursues ; 
And, when heavn’s lamps illume the skies, 
All to some haunt for rest retire, 


Till a fresh dawn that toil renews. 


But I, when a new morn doth rise, 
Chasing from earth its murky shades, 
While ring the forests with delight, 
Find no remission of my sighs ; 
And, soon as night her mantle spreads, 
I weep, and wish returning light. 


c Q 


20 


Quando la sera scaccia il chiaro giorno, 
E le tenebre nostre altrui fanv alba ; 
Miro pensoso le crudeli stelle, 

Che m’ hanno fatto di sensibil terra ; 
E maledico it di ch i vidi ’l sole, 


Che mi fa in vista uw uom nudrite in selva. 


Non credo che pascesse mai per selva 
St aspra fera, o di notte, 0 di giorno, 
Come costei, chi piango all ombra, e¢ al sole: 
E non mi stanca primo sonno, od alba ; 
Che bench’ i fia mortal corpo di terra, 


Lo mio fermo desir vien dalle stelle. 


Prima ch i torni a voi, lucenti stelle, 
O tomi git nell amorosa selva 
Lassando il corpo, che fia trita terra ; 
Vedess’ to in let pieta: ch’ in un sol giorne 
Pud_ristorar molt’ anni, e’nnanzi Cl alba 


Puommi arricchir dal tramontar del sole. 


421 


Again when eve bids day retreat, 
O’er other climes to dart its rays ; 
Pensive those cruel stars I view, 
Which influence thus my am’rous fate ; 
And imprecate that beauty’s blaze, 


Which o’er my form such wildness threw. 


No forest surcly in its glooms 
Nurtures a savage so unkind 
As she, who bids these sorrows flow : 
Me, nor the dawn, nor sleep o’ercomes ; 
For, though of mortal mould, my mind 


Feels more than passion’s mortal glow. 


Ere up to you, bright orbs, I fly, 
Or to Love’s bow’r speed down my way, 
While here my mould’ring limbs remain ; 
Let me her pity once espy : 
Thus, rich in bliss, one little day 


Shall recompense whole years of pain. % 


22 


Con let foss’ io da che si parte u sole ; 
E non ci vedess’ altri che be stelle ; 
Sol una notte, e mai non fosse ¢ alba; 
E non si trusformasse in verde selva 
Per uscirmi di braccia, come il giorno 


Che Apollo la seguia quaggiu per terra. 


Ma io sarod sotterra in secca selva ; 
E’l giorno andra pien di minute stelle, 


Prima ch a si dolce alba arrivi il sole. 


23 


Be Laura mine at set of sun; 
Let heav'n’s fires only mark our loves, 
And the day ne'er its light renew; 
My fond embrace may she not shun ; 
Nor, Phoebus-like, through laurel groves 


May I a nymph transform'd pursue! 


But I shall cast this mortal veil on earth, 
And stars shall gild the noon, ere such bright scenes have 
birth. 


24 


SONETTO VIII. 
26. 


Gras fiammeggiava 0 amorosa stella 

Per T oriente, el’? altra, che Giunone 

Suol far gelosa, nel settentrione 

Rotava i raggi suot lucente, e bella ; 
Levata era a filar la vecchierella 

Discinta, e scalza, e desto avea °l carbone: 

E gli amanti pungea quella stagione 

Che per usanza a lagrimar gli appella ; 
Quando mia speme gia condotta al verde 

Giunse nel cor, non per lusata via ; 

Che ’1 Pee tenea chiusa, e ’l dolor molle ; 
Quanto cangiata, oime, da quel di pria! 

E parea dir, perché tuo valor perde ? 


Peder questi occhi ancor non tt si tolle. 


25 


SONNET VIII. 


Turovcuour the orient now began to flame 
The star of love; while o’er the northern sky 
That, which has oft rais’d Juno’s jealousy, 
Pour'd forth its beauteous scintillating beam: 

Beside her kindled hearth the housewife dame, 
Half-drest, and slipshod ’gan her distaff ply: 
And now the wonted hour of woe drew nigh, 
That wakes to tears the lover from his dream : 

When my sweet hope unto my mind appear‘d, 
Not in the custom’d way unto my sight ; 

For grief had bath’d my lids, and sleep had weigh’d ; 
Ah me, how chang’d that form by love endear’d! 
‘* Why lose thy fortitude :” methought she said, 


“ These eyes not yet from thee withdraw ther light.” 


26 


SONETTO IX. 
27. 


A porto ; 8’ ancor vive il bel desio, 
Che t? infiammava alle Thessalice onde ; 
E se non hai 0 amate chiome bionde 
Voleendo gli anni gia poste in obbho ; 
Dal pigro gielo, e dal tempo aspro, e rio, 
Che dura quanto *l tuo viso s’ asconde ; 
Difendi or [ onorata, e sacra fronde 
Ove tu prima, e pow fu incescat’ 10: 
E per vertu dell? amorosa speme 
Che ti sostenne nella vita acerba, 
Di queste impression [ aere disgombra. 
Si vedrem poi per maraviglia insieme 
Seder la donna nostra sopra T° erba, 


E Yar delle sue braccia a sé stess’ omébra. 


27 


SONNET IX. 


od Pua svs, if that fond desire remains, 
Which fir’d thy breast near the Thessalian wave; 
If those bright tresses, which such pleasure gave, 
Through lapse of years thy mem’ry not disdains ; 
From sluggish frosts, fron: rude inclement rains, 
Which last the while thy beams our region leave, 
That honour’d sacred tree from peril save, 
Whose name of dear accordance wak’d bur pains ! 
And, by that am’rous hope which sooth’d thy care, 
What time expectant thou wert doom’d to sigh 
Dispel those vapours which disturb our sky ! 
So shall we both behold our fav’rite fair 
With wonder, seated on the grassy mead, 


And forming with her arms herself a shade. 


28 


SONETTO X. 


23. 


Soro, e pensoso 2 piu deserti campi 
Vo misurando a pass tardi, e lenti ; 
E gli occht porto per fuggir intenti 
Dove vestigio uman la rena stampi. 
Altro schermo non trovo che mi scampi 
Dal manifesto accorger delle genti: 
Perche negli atti d’ allegrezza spenti 
Di fuor si legge com’ io dentro avvampi: 
S?, ch’ 10 mi credo omai, che monti, e pragge, 
E fium, e selve sappian di che tempre 
Sia la mia vita; ch’ é celata altrut. 
Ma pur si aspre vie, ne si selvagge 
Cercar non so, ch’? Amor non venga sempre 


“Ragionando con meco, ed io con lui. 


29 


SONNET X. 


A111 solitary, lost in thought, I stray, 
Meas’ring with slow, slack step the plains most drear ; 
And round me look, intent on flight, where’er 
The tread of human kind may print the way. 
To shield me from th’ observant world’s survey 
No other refuge I discover near : 
For all my acts such lack of joyance wear, 
They show without what fires within me prey : 
Nay, well I ween that ever is reveal’d 
To mountaia, river, forest, and to plain 
My woe of life, from mortal race co’:ceal’d. 
But rough, and rugged haunts I seek in vain ; 
Still in those haunts am I by Love assail’d, 


Who converse with me holds, which I in turn maintain, 


30 


SONETTO XI. 
37. 


Li mio avversario ; an cui veder solete 
Gili occhi vostri, ch’ Amore, e’l ciel’ onora ; 
Con le non sue bellezze v’ innamora, 
Pint che’n guisa mortal, soacvt, e liete. 
Per consiglio di lui, donna, m’ avete 
Scacciato del mio dotce albergo fora ; 
Misero esilio! avvegnach’ io non fora 
D abitar degno ove vot sola siete. 
Mas tov era con saldi chiovi fisso, 
Non devea specchio farvi per mio danno, 
A voi stessa pracendo, aspra € superba. 
Certo se vi rimembra di Narcisso ; 
« Questo, e quel corso ad un termino vanno: 


Benche di si bel fior sia indegna 0 erba. 


Sl 


SONNET XI. 


My rival, in whose face you're wont to view 
Your own bright eyes, which Love and heav’n adore, 
With beauty not its own delights you more 
Than all that’s fair in mortal guise could do. 

Its counsel, lady, which with cause I rue, 
Compels me from my home so sweet before; 
Unhappy exile! merit gives no pow’r 
To share a station occupied by you. 

But to your glass if I transferr’d could be, 

Not your proud image only should you see, 
Becoming self-enamour’d, to my cost. 

Rightly reflect upon Narcissus’ fate; 

Both his, and yours a like event await : 


Although no soil has worth so choice a flow’r to boast. 


32 


SONETTO XII. 
41. 


Pencw io? abbia guardato di menzogna 
A mio podere, ed onorato assai, 
Ingrata lingua, gia pero non m’ ha 
Renduto onor, ma fatto ira, e vergogna: 
Che quando piu ’l tuo ajuto mi bisogna 
Per dimandar mercede, allor ti stat 
Sempre pit fredda; esc parole fai, 
Sono umperfette, e quasi d uom che sogna. 
Lagrime triste, e voi tutte le notti 
M’ accompagnate, ov’ 10 vorret star solo: 
Poi fuggite dinanzi alla mia pace. 
E voi st pronti a darmt angoscia, e duolo, 
Sospiri, allor traete lenti, e rotts. 


Sola la vista mia del cor non tace. 


33 


SONNET XII. 


A rnovucn from falsehood I did thee restrain 
With all my pow’r, and paid thee honour due, 
Ungrateful tongue; yet never did accrue 
Honour from thee, but shame, and fierce disdain: 

Most art thou cold, when most I want the strain 
Thy aid should lend while I for pity sue ; 

And all thy utt’rance is imperfect too, 
When thou dost speak, and as the dreamer’s vain. 

Ye too, sad tears, throughout each ling’ring night 
Upon me wait, when I alone would stay ; 

But, needed by my peace, you take your flight : 

And, all so prompt anguish, and grief t’ impart, 
You sighs, then slow, and broken breathe your way : 


My looks alone truly reveal my heart. ” 


CANZONE ITI. 
9. 


Netra stagion che ’l ciel rapido inchina 
Verso occidente, e che 'l di nostre vola 
A gente che di la forse ( aspetta ; 
Veggendosi in lontan paese sola, 
La stanca vecchierella pellegrina 
Raddoppia i passi, e pit e pits’ affretta: 
E poi cosi soletta 
Al fin di sua giornata 
Talora é consolata 
D’ alcun breve riposo ; ov’ ella obblia 
La noja, e’l mal della passata via. 
Ma lasso, ogni dolor che ’l di m’ adduce, 
Cresce, qualor s’ invia 


Per partirsi da noi 0 eterna luce. 


35 


ODE Iii. 


W uart time towards the western skies 
The sun with parting radiance flies, 
And other climes gilds with expected light, 
Some aged pilgrim dame who strays 
Alone, fatigued, through pathless ways, 


Hastens her step, and dreads th’ approach of night. 


Then, the day’s journey o'er, she'll steep 

Her sense awhile in grateful sleep ; 
Forgetting all the pain, and peril past; 

But I, alas! find no repose, 

Each sun to me brings added woes, 


While light’s eternal orb rolls from us fast. 


DQ 


36 


Come ’l sol volge le ’nfiammate rote, 
Per dar luogo alla notte ; onde discende 
Daglt altissimi monti maggior [ ombra ; 
LI? avaro zappador V arme riprende ; 

E con parole, e con alpestri note 

Ogni gravezza del suo petto sgombra: 
E poi la mensa ingombra 

Di povere vivande, 

Stmili a quelle ghiande, 

Le qua fuggendo tutto ’l mondo onora. 
Ma chi vuol, si rallegri ad ora ad ora: 
Ch ? pur non ebbi ancor non dire lieta, 
Ma riposata un’ ora, 


Ne per volger di ciel, ne di praneta. 


37 


When the sun’s wheels no longer glow, 
And hills their lengthen’d shadows throw, 

The hind collects his tools, and carols gay ; 
Then spreads his board with frugal fere, 
Such as those homely acorns were, 


Which all revere, yet casting them away. 


Let those, who pleasure can enjoy, 

In cheerfulness their hours employ ; 
While I, of all earth’s wretches most unblest, 

Whether the sun fierce darts his beams, 

Whether the moon more mildly gleams, 


Taste no delight, no momentary rest! 


3B 


Quando vede ’i pastor calare i raggi 
Del gran piancta al nido ov egli alberga, 
E” mbrunir le contrade d’ oriente ; 
Drizzasi in piedi, e con [ usata verga, 
Lassundo I erba, e le fontane, e i faggt, 
Move la schiera sua soavemente : 

Pot lontan dalla gente 

O casetta, o spelunca 

Di verdi frondi ingiunca ; 

Ivi senza pensicr s° adagta, e dorme. 

Ahi crudo Amor, ma tu allor pit m informe 
A seguir d una fira, che mi strugge, 

La voce, et passi, el orme ; 


E lei non stringi, che 8° appiatia, e fugge. 


39 


When the swain views the star of day 

Quench in the pillowing waves its ray, 
And scatter darkness o’er the eastern skies ; 

Rising, his custom’d crook he takes, 

The beech-wood, fountain, plain forsakes, 


As calmly homeward with his flock he hies. 


Remote from man, then on his bed 

In cot, or cave, with fresh leaves spread, 
He courts soft slumber, and suspense from care ; 

While thou, fell Love, bidst me pursue 

»That voice, those footsteps which subdue 


My soul; yet movest not th’ obdurate fair ! 


E i naviganti in qualche chiusa valle 
Gettan le membra, poi che ’l sol s’ asconde, 
Sul duro legno, e sotto l aspre gonne. 

Ma io ; perché 8’ attuffi in mezzo I’ onde, 
E lassi Ispagna dietro alle sue spalle, 

E Granata, e Marrocco, e le Colonne ; 

E gli uomini, e le donne, 

E ’l mondo, e gli animal 

Acquetino 1 lor mali; 

Fine non pongo al mio ostinato affanno: 

E duolm, ch’ ogni giorno arroge al danno: 
Ch’ ?' son gia pur crescendo tn questa voglia 
‘Ben presso al decim anno ; 


Ne poss’ indovinar chi me ne sctoglia. 


4l 


Lock’d in some bay, to taste repose 
On the hard deck, the sailor throws 
His coarse garb o’er him, when the car of light, 
Granada, with Morocco leaves, 
The Pillars fam’d, Iberia’s waves, 


And the world’s hush’d, and all its race, in night. 


But never will my sorrows cease, 
Successive days their sum increasc, 
Though just ten annual suns have mark’d my pain: 
Say, to this bosom’s poignant grief 
Who shall administer relief ? 


Say, who at length shall free me from my chain? 


E, perché un poco nel parlar mi sfogo ; 
Veggio la sera i buot tornare sciolti 
Dalle campagne, e da’ solcati coll. 
L miei sospiri ame perché non tolte 
Quando che sia? perché no’l grave giogo? 
Perche di, e notte gli occha met son moil ? 
Misero me, che volli, 
Quando primier si _fiso 
Gili tenni nel bel viso, 
Per iscolpirlo immaginando in parte 
Onde mai née per forza, née per arte 
Mosso sara ; fin ch’? sia dato in preda 
A chi tutto diparte ? 
Ne so ben’ anco, che di lei mi creda. 


and, since there's comfort in the strain, 
I see at eve along each plain, 

And furrow’d hill, the unyok’d team return : 
Why at that hour will no one stay 
My sighs, or bear my yoke away ° 


Why bath’d in tears must I unceasing mourn ? 


Wretch that I was, to fix my sight 
First on that face with such delight, 
Till on my thought its charms were strong imprest, 
Which force shall not efface, nor art, 
Ere from this frame my soul dispart ! 


Nor know I then if passion’s vot’ries rest. 


Canzon ; se? esser mece 
Dal mattino alla sera 
T’ ha fatto di mia schiera ; 
Tu non vorrai mostrarti in ciascun loco: 
E @’ altrui loda cureraz si poco, 
Ch’ assai ti fia pensar di poggio in poggio, 
Come m ha concio ’l foco 


Di questa viva petra ov io m appoggio. 


OD, hasty strain devoid of worth, 

Sad as the bard who brought thee forth, 
Shew not thyself, be with the world at strife, 

From nook to nook indulge thy grief ; 

While thy lorn parent seeks relief, 


Nursing that am’rous flame which feeds his life ! 


46 


CANZONE IVD. 
14. 


Perncue quel che mi trasse ad amar prima, 
Altrui colpa mi toglia; 


Del mio sermo voler gid non mi svoglia. 


Tra le chiome dell’ or nascose il laccio 
Al qual mi strinse Amore ; 
E da@ begli occhi mosse il freddo ghiaccio 
Che mi passo nel core 
Con la verti d un subito splendore, 
Che d ogni altra sua vogha 


Sol rumembrando ancor 0 anima spogta. 


47 


ODE IV. 


Tuovcn cruelty denies my view 
Those charms which led me first to love ; 
To passion yet will I be true, 


Nor shall my will rebellious prove. 


Amid the curls of golden harr, 
That wave those beauteous temples round, 
Cupid spread craftily the snare 


With which my captive heart he bound : 


And from those eyes he caught the ray, 
Which thaw’d the ice that fenc’d my breast, 
Chasing all other thoughts away 
With brightness suddenly imprest. 


48 


Tolta m é poi di que’ biondi capelli, 
Lasso, la dolce vista ; 
E’l volger di duo lumi onesti, e bell 
Col suo fuggir m attrista: 
Ma percheé ben morendo onor s’ acquista ; 
Per morte, née per doglia 


Non vo che da tal nodo Amor mi sciogha. 


49 


E.. now that hair of sunny gleam, 
Ah me! is ravish’d from my sight ; 
Those beauteous eyes withdraw their beam, 


- And change to sadness past delight. 


A glorious death by all is priz’d ; 
"Tis death alone shall break my chain : 
O be love’s timid wail despis’d ! 


Lovers should nobly suffer pain. 


CANZONE V. 
18. 


Perrone la vita é breve, 
E I’ ingegno paventa all’ alta tmpresa ; 
Ne di lui, ne di let molto mi fido ; 
Ma spero che sia intesa 
La dov’ io bramo, e¢ la dov’ esser deve, 
La doglia ma, la qual tacendo?’ grido: 
Occhi leggiadri, dow’ Amor fa nido, 
A voi rivolgo il mio debile stile 
Pigro da sé; ma’l gran pracer lo sprona: 
E chi di vot ragiona, 
Tien dal suggetto un abito gentile ; 
Che con I’ ale amorose 
Levando, il parte d ogni pensier vile. 
Con queste alzato vengo a dire or cose, 


Ch’ ho portate nel cor gran tempo ascose. 


ol 


ODE V. 


Since human life is frail, 
And genius trembles at the lofty theme ; 
I little confidence in either place ; 
But let ny tender wail 
There, where it ought, deserv’d attention claim, 
That wail which e’en in silence we may trace. 
O beauteous cyes, where Love doth nestling stay ! 
To you I turn my insufficient lay, 
Unapt to flow ; but passion’s goad I feel : 
And he, of you who sings, 
Such courteous habit by the strain is taught, 
That, borne on am’rous wings, 
He soars above the reacli of vulgar thought : 
Exalted thus, I venture to reveal 
What long my cautious heart has labour’d to conceal. 


E Q 


52 


Non perch’ io non m’ avveggia 
Quanto mia laude é ingiuriosa a vi: 
Ma contrastar non posso al gran desio, 
Lo quale é in me dapot 
Ch’ 0’ vidi quel che pensier non pareggia ; 
Non che ?? agguagl altrui parlar’, o mio. 
Principio del mio dolce stato rio, 
Altri che voi, so ben, che non m intende, 
Quando a gh ardenti rai neve dvvegno ; 
Vostro gentile sdegno 
Forse ch’ allor mia indegnitate off ende. 
O, se questa temenza 
Non temprasse 0 arsura che m' incende ; 
Beato venir men: che’n lor presenza 


M’ 2 pid caro tl morir, che’ viver senza. 


53 


Yes, well do I perceive 
To you how wrongful is my scanty praise : 
Yet the strong impulse cannot be withstood, 
That urges, since I view'd 
What fancy to the sight before ne'er gave, 
What ne'er before grac'd mine, or higher lays. 
Bright authors of my sadly-pleasing state, 
That you alone conceive me, well I know, 
When to your fierce beams I become as snow ! 
Your elegant disdain 
Haply then kindles at my worthless strain. 
Did not this dread create 
Some mitigation of my bosom’s heat, 
Death would be bliss: for greater joy ‘twould give 


With them to die, without them than to live, 


Dunque ch?’ non mi sfaccia, 
Si frale oggetto a si possente foco ; 
Non é proprio valor che me ne scampi : 
Ma la paura un poco; 
Che ’l sangue vago per le vene agghiaccia ; 
Risalda ’l cor, perché piu tempo avvampi. 
O poggi, o valli, o fiumt, o selve, 0 campt, 
O testimon’ della mia grave vita, 
Quante volte m’ udiste chiamar morte ? 
Ahi dolorosa sorte ! 
Lo star mi strugge, e’l fuggir non m aita. 
Ma ; se maggwr paura 
Non m’ affrenasse ; via corta, e spedita 
Trarrebbe a fin quest’ aspra pena, e dura ; 


E la colpa é di tal che non ha cura. 


55 


If not consumed quite, 

I the weak object of a flame so strong ; 

Tis not that safety springs from native might : 
But that some fear restrains, 

Which chills the current circling through my veins ; 

Strength’ning this heart, that it may suffer long. 

O hills, O vales, O forests, floods, and fields, 

Ye who have witness’d how my sad life flows, 

Oft have ye heard me call on death for aid. 
Ah, state surcharg’d with woes ! 

To stay destroys, and flight no succour yields. 
But had not higher dread 

Withheld, some sudden effort I had made, 

To end my sorrows, and protracted pains, 


Of which the beauteous cause insensible remains. 


Dolor, perchée mi ment 
Fuor di cammin’ a dir quel ch’? non vogho ? 
Sostien’ ch’ io vada ove 'l pracer mi spigne. 
Gia di voi non mi dogho, 
Occhi sopra ’l mortal corso sereni, 
Ne di lu ch’ a tal nodo mi distrigne. 
Vedete ben, quanti color dipigne 
Amor sovente in mezzo del mio volto ; 
E potrete pensar, qual dentro fammi, 
La ’ve di e notte stammi 
Addosso col poder ch’ ha in ‘voi raccolto, 
Luci beate, e hete ; 
Se non che 'l veder voi stesse v' é tolto: 
Ma quante volte a me vt rrvolgete, 


Conoscete in altrui quel che vor siete. 


57 


Why lead me, grief, astray 
From my first theme to chant a different lay ? 
Let me proceed where pleesure may invite. 
Tis not of you I plain, 
O eyes, beyond compare serenely bright; 
Nor yet of him, who binds me in his chain ! 
Ye clearly can behold the hues that Love 
Scatters ofttime on my dejected face ; 
And fancy may his inward workings trace 
There where, whole nights and days, 
He rules with pow’r deriv'd from your bright rays : 
What rapture would ye prove, 
If you, dear lights, upon yourselves could gaze ! 
But, frequent as you bend your beams on me, 


What influence you possess you in another see. 


58 


S’ a voi fosse si nota 

La divina incredibile bellezza 

Di ch’ io ragiono, come a cht la mira ; 
Misurata allegresza 
Non avria’l cor: pero forse & remota 
Dal vigor natural che v’ apre, e gira. 
Felice l’ alma che per voi sospira, 
Lumi del ciel; per li quali io ringrazio 
La vita, che per altro non m’ é a grado. 
Oime ; perche si rado 
MMi date quel, dond’ to mai non son sazio ? 
Perche non piu sovente 
Mirate, qual amor di me fa strazio? 
E perché mi spoghate immantenente 


Del ben, ch’ ad ora ad or l’ anima sente ? 


59 


O if to you were known 
That beauty which I sing, immense, divine, 
As unto him on whom its glories shine ! 
The heart had then o’erflown 
With joy unbounded, such as is denied 
Unto that nature which its acts doth guide. 
How happy is the soul for you that sighs, 
Celestial lights ; which lend a charm to life, 
And inake me bless what else I should not prize ! 
Ah why, so seldom why 
Afford what ne'er can cause satiety ? 
More often to your sight 
Why not bring Love, who holds me constant strife 
And why so soon of joys despoil me quite, 


Which ever and anon my tranced soul delight ? 


Dico, ch’ ad ora ad ora, 
Vostra mercede, ? sento in mezzo l’ alma 
Una dolcezza inusitata, e nova ; 
La qual’ ogni altra salma 
Di nojosi penster disgombra allora, 
S? che di mille un sol vi si ritrova: 
Quel tanto a me, non piu, del viver giova : 
E se questo mio ben durasse alquanto, 
Nullo stato agguagliarsi al mio potrebbe : 
Ma forse altrui farebbe 
Invido, e me superbo l’ onor tanto: 
Pero, lasso, conviensi 
Che lL’ estremo del riso assagha il pianto ; 
E ’nterrompendo quellt spirtt accensi, 


A me ritorn, e di me stesso penst. 


61 


Yes, debted to your grace, 

Frequent I feel throughout my inmost soul 
Unwonted floods of sweetest rapture roll ; 
Relieving so the mind, 

That all oppressive thoughts are left behind, 

And of a thousand only one has place ; 

For which alone this life is dear to me. 

O might the blessing of duration prove, 

Not equall’d then could my condition be ! 
But this would haply move 

In others envy, in myself vain pride. 
That pain should be allied 

To pleasure is, alas, decreed above ! 

Then, stifling all the ardour of desire, 


Homeward I turn my thoughts, and jn myself retire. 


62 


L’ amoroso pensiero, 
Ch’ alberga dentro, in vot mi si discopre 
Tal, che mi trae del cor’ ogni altra gigja: 
Onde parole, ed opre 
Escon di me si fatte allor, ch’ i’ spero 
Farmi immortal, perché la carne moja. 
Fugge al vostro apparire angoscia, € noja ; 
E nel vostro partir tornano inseme : 
Ma perche la memoria innamorata 
Chiude lor poi l’ entrata ; 
Di la non vanno dalle parti estreme : 
Onde s alcun bel frutto 
Nasce dt me ; da voi vien prima u seme: 
Lo per me son quasi un terreno asciutto 


Colto da vot, el pregio é vostro in tutto. 


63 


So sweetly shines reveal'd 
The am’rous thought within your soul which dwells, 
That other joys it from my heart expels : 
Hence I aspire to frame 
Lays whereon hope may build a deathless name, 
When in the tomb my dust shall lie conceal’d. 
At your approach anguish, and sorrow fly ; 
These as your beams retire again draw nigh: 
Yet outward acts their influence ne’er betray ; 
For doting memory 
Dwells on the past, and chases them away. 
Whatever then of worth 
My genius ripens owes to you its birth: 
To you all honour, and all praise is due ; 


Myself a barren soil, and cultur'd but by you. 


Canzon, tu non m’ acqueti, anzi m' infiammi 
A dir di quel ch’ a me stesso m’ invola: 


Pero sia certa di non esser sola. 


65 


Thy strains, O song! appease me not, but fire; 
Chanting a theme that wings my wild desire: 


Trust me, thou shalt ere long a sister song acquire. 


SONETTO XIII. 
58. 


Quanvo giunse a Simon P alto concetto 
Ch’ a mio nome gli pose in man lo stile ; 
S” avesse dato all opera gentile 
Con la figura voce, ed intelletto ; 

Di sospir molti mt sgombrava il petto: 
Che cid ch altri han pit caro, a me fan vile: 
Pero che’n vista ella si mostra umile, 
Promettendomi pace nell aspetto. 

Ma poi ch’? vengo a ragionar con lei; 
Benignamente assai par che m’ ascolte ; 
Se risponder savesse a detti miet. 

Pigmation, quanto lodar ti dei 
Dell’ immagine tua, se mille volte 


WN? avesti quel, ch’? sol una vorrei ! 


67 


SONNET XIII. 


Wien Simon at my wish the proud design 
Conceiv’d, which in his hand the pencil plae’d, 
Had he, while loveliness his picture grac’d, 

But added spcech, and mind to charms divine ; 

What sighs he then had spar’d this breast of mine : 
That bliss had giv’n to higher bliss distaste : 

For, when such meekness in her look was trac’d, 
"Twould seem she soon to kindness might incline. 

But, urging converse with the portray’d fair, 
Methinks she deigns attcntion to my pray’r, 
Though wanting to reply the pow’r of voice. 

What praise thyself, Pygmalion, hast thou gain’d ; 
Forming that image, whence thou hast obtain’d 


A thousand times what, once obtain’d, would me rejoi 


68 


SONETTO XIV. 
69. 


Eranoi cape. a’ ore all’ aura spars, 
Che’n mille dolci nodi gli avvolgea ; 
El vago lume oltra misura ardea 
Di quet begli occhi, ch’ or ne son si scarsi ; 
E' ’l viso di pietosi color farsi, 
Non so se vero, o falso mi parea: 
[’ che l’ esca amorosa al petto avea, 
Qual meravigha, se di subit’ arsi ? 
Non era ’landar suo cosa mortale, 
Ma d@’ angelica forma ; ¢ le parole 
Sonavan altro, che pur coce umana. 
Uno spirto celeste, un vivo sole 
Fu quel ch’ w vidi: e se non fosse or tale ; 


Piaga per allentar d’ arco non sana. 


69 


SONNET XIV. 


Hex golden tresses on the wind she threw, 
Which twisted them in many a beauteous braid ; 
And in her fine eyes burning glances playd, 
With lovely light, which now they seldom shew : 

Ah then it seem’d her face wore pity’s hue, 

Yet haply fancy my fond sense betray’d ; 
Nor strange that I, in whose warm heart was laid 
Love’s fuel, suddenly enkindled grew ! 

Not like a mortal’s did her step appear, 

Angelic was her form ; her voice, methought, 
Pour’d more than human accents on the ear, 

A living sun was what my vision caught, 

A spirit pure ; and though not such still found, 
Unbending of the bow ne’er heals the wound. 


70 


SONETTO XV. 
71. 


Pusnerrs, donne, e con voi pianga Amore ; 
Piangete, amanti, per ciascun paese ; 
Poi che morto e colui che tutto intese 
In farvi, mentre visse al mondo, onore. 

To per me prego il mio acerbo dolore, 

Non sian da lui le lagrime contese ; 
E mi sia di sospir tanto cortese, 
Quanto bisogua a disfogare il core. 

Piangan le rime ancor, piangano 1 versi ; 
Perche ’l nostro amoroso Messer Cino 
Novellamente s’ é da noi partito. 

Pianga Pistgja, e 2 cittadin perversi, 

Che : perdut’ hanno si dolce vicino, 
E rallegres’ ul cielo, ov’ ello é gito. 


71 


SONNET XV. 


Weep beauteous damsels, and let Cupid weep, 
Of ev’ry region weep ye lover train ; 
He, who so skilfully attun’d his strain 
To your fond cause, is sunk in death’s cold sleep ! 
Such limits let not my affliction keep, 
As may the solace of soft tears restrain ; 
And, to relieve my bosom of its pain, 
Be all my sighs tumultuous, utter’d deep | 
Let song itself, and votaries of verse, 
Breathe mournful accents o'er our Cino’s bier, 
Who late is gone to number with the blest ! 
O weep, Pistoia, weep your sons perverse ; 
Its choicest habitant has fled our sphere, 


And heav’n may glory in its welcome guest ! 


(2 


SONETTO XVI. 
81. 


Cesare, pot che ’l traditor d’ Egitto 
Li fece wl don dell’ onorata testa, 
Celando V allegrezza manifesta 
Pianse per gh occhi fuor, siccome é scritto. 

Ed Annibal, quand’ all’ imperio affiitto 
Vide farsi fortuna si molesta, 

Rise fra gente lagrimosa, e mesta, 
Per isfogare il suo acerbo despitto : 

E cosi avven che ¢ animo ctascuna 
Sua passion sotto °l contrario manto 
Ricopre con la vista or chiara, or bruna. 

Pero, s alcuna volta 2’ rido, oc anto ; 
Facciol, perch i’ non ho se non quest’ una 


Via da celare tl mio angoscioso pianto. 


73 


SONNET XVI. 


Wauen Egypt’s traitor Pompey’s honour’d head 

To Cesar sent; then, records so relate, 

To shroud a gladness manifestly great, 

Some feigned tears the specious monarch shed : 
And, when misfortune her dark mantle spread 

O’er Hannibal, and his afflicted state, 

He laugh’d midst those who wept their adverse fate, 

That rank despite to wreak defeat had bred : 
Thus doth the mind oft variously conceal 

Its sevral passions by a different veil ; 

Now with a countenance that’s sad, now gay : 
So mirth, and song if sometimes I employ ; 

"Tis but to hide those sorrows that annoy, 


Tis but to chase my am’rous cares away. 


74 


SONETTO XVII. 
91. 


Dev empia Babilonia, ond’ é fuggita 
Ogni vergogna, ond’ ogni bene é fori ; 
Albergo di dolor, madre @’ errori, 

Son fuggit’ io per allungar la vita. 

Qui mi sto solo ; e, come Amor m’ invita, — 
Or rimc, eversi, or colyo erbette, e fiore, 
Seco parlando, ed a temp mighori 
Sempre pensando ; e questo sol m’ aita. 

Ne del vulgo mi cal, ne di fortuna, 

Ne di me molto, née di cosa vile ; 
Neé dentro sento, né di fuor gran caldo: 

Sol due persone cheggio; e vorrei una 
€ol cor ver me pacificato, e umile ; 


L? altro col pie, st come mai fu, salde. 


74 


SONNET XVII. 


Yes, out of impious Babylon I’m flown, 
Whence flown all shame, whence banish’d is all good, 
That nurse of error, and of guilt th’ abode, 
To lengthen out a life which else were gone: 

There as Love prompts, while wandering alone, 
I now a garland weave, and now an ode; 
With him I commune, and in pensive mood 
Hope better times ; this only checks my moan. 

Nor for the throng, nor fortune do I care, 

Nor for myself, nor sublunary things ; 
No ardour outwardly, or inly springs : 

I ask two persons only ; let my fair 

For me a kind, and tender heart maintain; 


And be my friend secure in his high post again ! 


76 


SONETTO XVIII. 
98. 


Quer vago empalhdir, che’l dolce riso 
D? un amorosa nebbia ricoperse, 
Con tanta maestade al cor s offerse, 
Che li si_fece incontr’ a mezzo °l viso. 
Conobit allor, siccome in paradiso 
Vede l'un P altro ; in tal guisa s aperse 
Quel pietoso pensier ch altri non scerse: 
Ma vidil io, ch’ altrove non m’ affso. 
Ogni angelica vista, ogni atto umile, 
Che giammai in donna ov’ amor fosse, apparve, 
Fora uno sdegno a lato a quel ch’ v dico. 
Chinava a terra il bel guardo gentile ; 
« E tacendo dicea, com’ ame parve, 


Chi m’ allontana tl mio fedele amice 2 


i 


SONNET XVIII. 


Tue pallid tint of loveliness, which threw 
A tender cloud upon her smiling face, 
Came to my heart with such an awful grace, 
That in my looks that heart to meet it flew. 
Then how in paradise the blessed view 
Fach other I perceiv’d ; e’en so took place 
The gentle sentiment none else could trace, 
Save me, whose gaze no other object knew. 
The most angelic look that face could wear, 
The mildest manners female love could show, 
Compar’d with what I sing might scorn appear : 
To earth she calmly bent her decent brow; 
And silently she said, or seem‘d to say, 


“* Who bears far hence my faithful friend away :” 


78 


CANZONE FI. 
26. 


Sz 7 pensier che mi strugge, 
Com’ ¢ pungente, e saldo, 
Cost vestisse d un color conforme : 
Forse tal m’ arde, e fugge, 
Ch avcria parte del caldo ; 
E desteriast Amor la dov’ or dorme: 
Men solitarie [ orme 
Foran de mier pre lassr 
Per campagne, e per colli: 
Men gli occhi ad ogni or mols: ; 
Ardendo let che come un ghiaccio stassi ; 
E non lassa in me dramma,, 


Che non sia foco, ¢ fiamma. 


79 


ODE VI. 


O rar my cheeks were taught 
By the fond, wasting thought 

‘lo wear such hues as could its influence speak ; 
Then the dear, scornful fair 
Might all my ardour share; 

And where Love slumbers now he might awake ! 
Less oft the hill, and mead 
My wearied feet should tread ; 

[ess oft perhaps these eyes with tears should stream ; 
If she, who cold as snow, 
With equal fire would glow ; 


She who dissolves me, and converts to flame. 


80 


Peré ch’ Amor mi sforze, 
E di saver mi spogha ; 
Parlo in rim aspre, e adi dolcezza ignude : 
Ma non sempre alla scorza 
Ramo, né’n fior, ne’n foglia 
Mostra di fuor sua natural virtude. 
Miri cio che’l cor chiude, 
Amor, e que’ beg occhi 
Ove si siede all’ ombra. 
Sel dolor che si sgombra, 
Avven che’n pianto, o’n lamentar trabocchi ; 
LD un’ a me noce, el’ altro 


Atrui ; ch io non lo scaltro. 


81 


Since Love exerts his sway, 
And bears my sense away, 

I chant uncouth, and inharmonious songs : 
Nor leaves, nor blossoms show, 
Nor rind, upon the bough, 

What is the nature which thereto belongs. 
Love, and those beauteous eyes, 
Beneath whose shade he lies, 

Discover all the heart can comprehend : 
When vented are my cares 
In loud complaints, and tears; 


These harm myself, and others those offend. 


82 


Dolci rime leggiadre ; 
Che nel primiero assalto 
D’ Amor’ usai, quand’ 10 non ebbi alr’ arme ; 
Chi verrd mat, che squadre 
Questo mio cor di smalto ; 
Ch’ almen, com’ io solea possa sfogarme ? 
Ch’ aver dentr’ a lui parme 
Un, che Madonna sempre 
Dipinge, e di let parla: 
A voler pot ritrarla, 
Per me non basto ; ¢ par ch’ io me ne stempre: 
Lasso, cost m’ & scorso 


Lo mio dolce soccorso. 


Sweet lays of sportive vein, 
Which help’d me to sustain 

Love’s first assault, the only arms I bore; 
This flinty breast say who 
Shall once again subdue, 

That I with song may sooth me as before ? 
Some pow’r appears to trace 
Within me Laura’s face, 

Whispers her name; and strait in verse I strive 
To picture her again, 

But the fond effort’s vain : 


Me of my solace thus doth fate deprive. 


Come fanciul, ch’ appena 
Volge la lingua, e snoda ; 
Che dir non sa, ma’l piu tacer gh é nqa ; 
Cosi ’l desir mi mena 
A dire: evo che m’ oda 
La mia dolce nemica anzi ch’ 10 mga. 
Se forze ogni sua giogja 
Nel suo bel viso é solo, 
E di tutt altro e schiva ; 
Odi ’l tu verde rvva ; 
E presta a miei sospir si largo volo, 
Che sempre si ridica 


Come tu m’ eri amica. 


85 


E’en as some babe unties 
Its tongue in stamm’ring guise, 
Who cannot speak, yet will not silence keep : 
So fond words I essay ; 
And listen’d be the lay 
By my fair foe, ere in the tomb I sleep! 
But if, of beauty vain, 
She treats me with disdain ; 
Do thou, O verdant shore, attend my sighs: 
Let them so freely flow, 
That all the world may know, 


My sorrow thou at least didst not despise ! 


Ben sai, che si bel prede 

Non tocco terra unqguanco, 

Come quel, di che gia segnata fostt: 
Onde ’! cor lasso riede 
Col tormentoso fianco 
A partir teco i lor pensier nasoostt. 
Cosi avestu riposti 
De’ bei vestigi sparsi 
Ancor tra’ fori, e Pf erba: 
Che la mia vita acerba 
Lagrimando trovasse ove acquetarst. 
Ma come pu s° appaga 


LI? alma dubbiosa, e vaga. 


87 


And well art thou aware, 
That never foot so fair 
The soil e’er prest as that which trod thee late; 
My sunk soul, and worn heart 
Now seek thee, to impart 
The secret griefs that on my passion wait. 
If on thy margent green, 
Or midst thy flow’rs, were seen 
Some traces of her footsteps ling’ring there ; 
My wearted life ’twould cheer, 
Bitter d with many a tear : 


Ah, now what means are left to sooth my care? 


Ovunque gl occhi volgo, 
Trovo un dolce sereno, 
Pensando ; qut percosse it vago lume. 
Qualunque erba, o fior colgo, 
Credo che nel terreno 
Aggia radice, ov ella ebbe in costume 
Gir fra le piagge, el fiume, 
E talor farsi un seggio 
Fresco, fiortto, e verde: 
Cosi nulla sen’ perde ; 
E piu certezza averne fora il peggio. 
Spirto beato, guale 


Se’, quando altrui fai tale ? 


Where’er I bend mine eye, 
What sweet serenity 

I feel, totthink here Laura shone of yore. 
Each plant, and scented bloom 
I gather, seems to come 

From where she wander'd on the custom’d shore : 
Oftimes in this retreat 
A fresh, and fragrant seat 

She found ; at least so fancy’s vision shows : 


And never let truth seek 





Th’ illusion dear to break 


O spirit blest, from whom such magick flows ' 


O poverella mia, come se” rozza: 
Credo che tel conoschi: 


Rimanti in questi boschi. 


Ol 


To thee, my simple song, 
No polish doth belong ; 
Thyself art conscious of thy little worth : 
Solicit not renown 
Throughout the busy town, 
But dwell within the shade that gave thee birth. 


92 


SONETTO XIX. 
103. 


Amon m’ ha posto come segno a strale, 

Com’ al sol neve, come cera al_foco, 

E come nebbia al vento ; e son gia roco, 

Donna, mercé chiamando ; e voi non cale. 
Daglt occht vostri uscio ’l colpo mortale, 

Contra cui non mi val tempo, née loco: 

Da vor sola procede (e parvi un gioco) 

Il sole, e’l foco, e’l vento, ond’ io son tale. 
I pensier son saette, e ’l viso un sole ; 

E ’l desir foco; e ’nsteme con quest’ arme 

Mi punge Amor, w abbaglia, e mi distrugge : 
E I’ angelico canto, e le parole, 

Cot dolce spirto, ond’ io non posso aitarme, 


Son 1’ aura innanzi a cui mia vita fugge. 


SONNET XIX. 


Love makes me as the target for his dart, 
As snow in sunshine, or as wax in flame, 
Or gale-driv’n cloud ; and, Laura, on thy name 
I call, but thou no pity wilt impart. 

Thy radiant eyes first caus’d my bosom’s smart ; 
No time, no place can shield me from their beam ; 
From thee (but, ah, thou treat’st it as a dream !) 
Procecd the torments of my suff’ring heart. 

Each thought’s an arrow, and thy face a sun, 
My passion’s flame: and these doth Love employ 
To wound my breast, to dazzle, and destroy. 

Thy heav’nly song, thy speech with which I’m won, 
All thy sweet breathings of such strong controul, 


Form the dear gale that bears away my soul. 


SONETTO XxX. 


104. 


Pacr non trove, enon ho da far guerra; 
E temo, e spero, ed ardo, e son’ un ghiaccw; 
E volo sopra ’l cielo, e geaccio in terra: 
E nulla stringo, e tutto ’l mondo abbraccio. 
Tal m’ ha in prigion, che non m’ apre, ne serra ; 
Ne per suo mi riten, né scioglie tl laccio ; 
E non m ancide Amor, e non m: sferra ; 
Ne mi vuol vrvo, née mi trae d impaccio. 
Veggto senz’ occhi ; e non ho lingua, e grido ; 
E bramo di perir, e cheggio atta ; 
Ed ho in odio me stesso, ed amo alirui: 
Pascomi di dolor ; piangendo rido ; 
Egualmente me spiace morte, e vita. 


In questo stato son, donna, per ‘oui. 


SONNET XX. 


Warrare I cannot wage, yet know not peace; 
I fear, I hope, I burn, I freeze again ; 
Mount to the skies, then bow to earth my face; 
Grasp the whole world, yet nothing I obtain. 
His pris’ner Love nor frees, nor will detain ; 
In toils he holds me not, nor will release ; 
He slays me not, nor yet will he unchain ; 
Nor joy allows, nor lets my sorrow cease. 
Sightless I see my fair; though mute, I mourn; 
I scorn existence, and yet court its stay ; 
Detest myself, and for another burn ; 
By grief I’m nurtur’d; and, though tearful, gay ; 
Death I despise, and life alike I hate: 
Such, lady, dost thou make my wayward state! 


SONETTO XXI. 
105. 


Fiamma dal ciel su le tue treccie prova, 
Malvagia ; che dal fiume, e dalle ghiande 
Per V altrw impoverir se’ ricca, e grande ; 
Poi che di mal oprar tanto ti gwva: 

Nido di tradimenti-; in cui st cova 
Quanto mal per lo mondo oggi st spande : 
Di vin serva, di letti, e di vivande ; 

In cui lussuria fa 0 ultima prova. 

Per le camere tue fanciulle, e vecchi 
Vanno trescando, e Belzebub in mezzo 
Co’ mantic, e col focco, e con gli specchi. 

Gia non fostu nudrita in piume al rezzo ; 
Ma nuda al venio, e scalza fra li stecchi : 


e 
Or vvvi si, ch’ a Dio ne venga il lezzo. 


SONNET XXI. 


May fire from heav’n rain down upon thy head, 
Thou most accurst ; who simple fare casts by, 
Made rich and great by others’ poverty ; 

How dost thou glory in thy vile misdeed ! 

Nest of all treachery, in which is bred 
Whate’er of sin now through the world doth fly ; 
Of wine the slave, of sloth, of gluttony ; 

With sensuality’s excesses fed ! 

Old men, and harlots through thy chambers dance ; 
Then in the midst see Belzebub advance 
With mirrors, and provocatives obscene. 

Erewhile thou wert not shelter’d, nurs’d on down ; 
But naked, barefoot on the straw wert thrown : 


Now rank to Heav’n ascends thy life unclean. 


98 


CANZONE VII. 
33. 


Dy tempo in tempo mi si fa men dura 

TP angelica figura, el dolce riso ; 

EV aria del bel viso, 

E degh occhi leggiadri meno oscura. 
Che fanno meco omai questi sospiri, 

Che nascean di dolore, 

E mostravan di fore 

La mia angosciosa, e disperata vita ? 

S” avven che ’l volto in quella parte giri, 

Per acquetar il core ; 

Parmi veder Amore 

Mantener mia ragion’, e darmi aita: 

Ne pero trovo ancor guerra finita, 

Ne tranquillo ogni stato del cor mio: 

Che pit m’ arde ’l desio, 


Quanto piu la speranza m assicura. 


99 


ODE VIL. 


F ROM time to time less cruelty I trace 

In her sweet smile, and form divinely fair ; 
Less clouded doth appear 

The heav’n of her fine eyes, and lovely face. 

What then at last avail to me those sighs, 
Which from my sorrows flow, 
And in my semblance show 

The life of anguish, and despair I lead? 

If towards her perchance | bend mine eyes, 
Some solace to bestow 
Upon my bosom’s woe ; 

Methinks Love takes my part, and lends me aid: 

Yet still I cannot find the conflict stay’d, 

Nor tranquil is my heart in ev'ry state ; 
For, ah, my passion’s heat 


More strongly glows within, as my fond hopes increase! 


100 


SONETTO XXII. 
118. 


Non @ atra, e tempestosa onda marina 
Fuggio in porto giammai stanco nocchiero ; 
Com’ io dal fosco, e torbido pensiero 
Fuggo, ove ’l gran desio mi sprona, e ’nchina: 

Ne mortal vista mai luce divina 
Vinse ; come la mia quel raggio altero 
Del bel dolce soave bianco, e nero, 

In che 1 suoi strali Amor dora, ed affina. 

Cieco non gid, ma faretrato il veggo ; 
Nudo,.se non quanto vergogna 1 vela ; 
Garzon con l ali, non pinto, ma vivo. 

Indi mi mostra quel ch’ a molti cela: 

Ch’ a parte a parte entr? a begh occhi leggo 


‘Quan? io parlo d’ amore, e quant’ io scrivo. 


101 


SONNET XXII. 


No wearied mariner to port e’er fled 


From the dark billow, when some tempest’s nigh ; 
As from tumultuous gloomy thoughts I fly, 
Thoughts by the force of goading passion bred : 
Nor wrathful glance of heav'n so surely sped 
Destruction to man’s sight ; as docs that eye, 
Within whose bright black orb love’s Deity 
Sharpens each dart, and tips with gold its head. 
Enthron’d in radiance there he sits, not blind, 
Quiver’d, and naked, or by shame just veild, 
A live, not fabled boy, with changeful wing ; 
Thence unto me he lends instruction kind, 
And arts of verse from meaner bards conceal’@: 


Thus am I taught whate’er of love I write, or sing. 


102 


SONETTO XXIII. 
123. 


TI vivs in terra angelici costumi, 

E celesti bellezze al mondo sole, 

Tal, che di rimembrar mi giova, e dole ; 

Che quant’ io miro, par sogni, ombre, e fumi: 
E vidi lagrimar que’ duo bei lum, 

C’ han fatto mille volte invidia al sole : 

Ed udi sospirando dir parole, 

Che farian gir 1 monti, e star i _fiumi. 
Amor, senno, valor, pietate, e doglia 

Facean piangendo un piu dolce concento 

D' ogni altro, che nel mondo udir si sogha: 
Ed era’l cielo all’ armonia si 'ntento, 

Che non si vedea in ramo mover foglia ; 


Tanto dolcezza avea pren |’ aere, e’l vento. 


105 


SONNET XXIUI. 


Yes, I beheld on earth angelick grace, 

And charms divine which mortals rarely see, 
Such as both glad, and pain the memory ; 
Vain, light, unreal is all else I trace: 

Tears I saw shower’d from those fine eyes apace, 
Of which the sun oftimes might envious be ; 
Accents I heard sigh’d forth so movingly, 

As to stay floods, or mountains to displace. 

Love, and good-sense, firmness, with pity join’d, 
And wailful grief a sweeter concert made 
Than ever yet was pour’d on human ear: 

And heav’n unto the musick so inclin’d, 

That not a leaf was seen to stir the shade; , 


Such melody had fraught the winds, the atmosphere. 


104 


SONETTO XXIV. 


126. 


Iv qual parte del ciel’, in quale tdea 
Era Vl esempio onde, Natura tolse 
Quel bel viso leggiadro, in cl ella volse 
Mostrar quaggiu, quanto lassu potea ? 
Qual ninfa in fonti, in selve mai qual dea 
Chiome @ oro si fino all’ aura sciolse ? 
Quand un cor tante in sé virtuti accolse ? 
Benche la somma é di mia morte rea. 
Per divina bellezza indarno mira 
Chi gli occhi di costet gid@mmai non vide, 
Come soavemente ella gli gira. 
Non sa com’ Amor sana, e come ancide, 
Chi gon sa come dolce ella sospira, 


E come dolce parla, e dolce ride. 


105 


SONNET XXIV. 


Say from what part of heav’n ‘twas Nature drew, 
From what idea, that so perfect mould 
To form such features, bidding us behold, 
In charms below, what she above could do? 
What fountain-nymph, what dryad-maid e’er threw 
Upon the wind such tresses of pure gold? 
What heart such num’rous virtues can unfold? 
Although the chiefest all my fond hopes slew. 
Hie for celestial charms may look in vain, 
Who has not seen my fair-one’s radiant cyes, 
And felt their glances pleasingly beguile. 
How Love can heal his wounds, then wound again, 
He only knows, who knows how sweet her sighs, 


How sweet her converse, and how sweet her smile. 


106 


SONETTO XXV. 


129. 


Lert fori, ¢ felici, e ben nate erbe, 
Che Madonna passando premer sole ; 
Piaggia, ch ascolti sue dolci parole, 
E del bel piede alcun vestigio serbe ; 
Schiettt arboscelli, e verdi frondi acerbe ; 
Amorosctte, e pallide viole ; 
Ombrose selve, ove percote i sole, 
Che vi fa co suoi raggi alte, e superbe ; 
O soave contrada; o puro fiume, 
Che bagni ’l suo bel viso, e gli occhi chiart, 
E prendt qualita dal vivo lume ; 
Quanto v’ invidio gh atti onesti, e cart: 
Nop fia in voi scogho omai, che per costume 


D’ arder con la mia fiamma non impari. 


107 


SONNET XXV. 


Gay joyous blaoms, and herbage glad with show’rs 
O’er which my pensive fair was wont to stray! 
You plain, who listen her melodious lay, 

As her fair feet imprint your waste of flow’rs! 

Ye shrubs so spruce; ye green, unfolding bow’rs ; 
Ye violets clad in amrrous, pale array ; 

You shadowy grove, gilded by beauty’s ray, 
Whose top made proud majestically tow’rs ! 

O, pleasant country! O, translucent stream, 
Bathing her lovely face, her eves so clear, 

While of their living light you catch the beam ! 

I envy ye her actions chaste, and dear : 

No rock shall stud your soil, but what shall learn 


Henceforth with passion strong as mine to burn. 


108 


SONETTO XXVI. 
137. 


Priv volte gia dal bel sembiante umano 

fo preso ardir con le mie fide scorte, 

D’ assalir con parole oneste, accorte 

La mia nemica in atto umile, e piano: 
Fanno poi gli occht suot mio pensier vano ; 

Perch’ ogni mia fortuna, ogni mia sorte, 

Afio ben, mio male, e mia vita, e mia morte 

Quci, che solo il puod far, l’ ha posto in mano. 
Ona’ io non pote’ mat formar parola, 

Ch altro che da me stesso fosse intesa ; 

Cosi m’ ha fatto Amor tremante, e fioco : 
E yeggi or ben, che caritate accesa 

Lega la lingua altrui, gli smrti invola. 


Chi pud dir com’ egli arde, @’n picciol foco, 


109 


SONNET XXVI. 


Orr as her angel face compassion wore, 
With tears whose eloquetice scarce fails to move, 
With bland and courteous speech, I boldly strove 
To sooth my foe, and in meek guise implore : 
But soon her eyes inspire vain hopes no more ; 
For all my fortune, all my fate in love, 
My life, my death, the good, the ills I prove, 
To her are trusted by one sov'reign Pow’r. 
Hence ‘tis, whene‘er my lips would silence break, 
Scarce can I hear the accents which I vent, 
By passion render d spiritless, and weak. 
Ah, now I find that fondness to excess 
Fetters the tongue, and overpowrs intent : 


Faint is the flame that language can express ! 


110 


SONETTO XXVII. 
147. 


Po, ben puo’ tu portartene la scorsa 
Di me con tue possenti, e rapid’ onde: 
Ma lo spirto, ch’ w’ entro st nasconde, 
Non cura né di tua, né d’ altrui forza: 
Lo qual, senz’ alternar poggia con orza, 
Dritto per l’ aure al suo desir seconde 
Battendo U ali verso l’ aurea fronde 
L’ acqua, el vento, e la vela, e t remi sforza. 
Re degli altri; superbo, altero fume ; 
Ch ’ncontri 'l sol quando e’ ne mena it giorno, 
E ’n ponente abbandoni un piu bel lume ; 
Tu te ne vai col mio mortal sul corno: 
LE altro converto d’ amorose piume 


Torna volando al suo dolcé soggiarno. 


lll 


SONNET XXVIII. 


Tov Po to distant realms this frame mayst bear 
On thy all-powerful, thy headlong tide ; 
But the free spirit that within doth bide 
Nor for thy might, nor ought of might doth care: 
Not varying here its course, nor shifting there, 
Betore the kind, wish‘d gale it joys to glide ; 
Clapping its wings, it secks the laurel’s pride, 
In spite of sails, or oars, of sea, or air. 
Monarch of floods, magnificent, and great ; 
That meet’st the sun as he leads on the day, 
But in the west dost quit a fairer light ; 
Thy curved course this body wafts elate ; 
While on love’s pinions my soul speeds its way,, 


And to its darling hofne directs its flight ! 


112 


SONETTO XXVITI. 


159. 


S114m0, Amor, aveder la gloria nostra 
Cose sopra natura altere, € nove: 

Vedi ben, quanta in let dolcezza piove: 
Vedi lume che’l cielo in terra mostra: 
Vedi, quant’ arte dora, e ’mperla, e ’nnostra 
I? abito eletto, e mai non visto altrove ; 
Che dolcemente 1 piedi, e gli occhi move 
Per questa di bei colli ombrosa chiostra. 

L erbetta verde, ei flor di color mille 
Sparsi sotto quell’ elce antigua, e negra, 
Pregan pur, che 'l bel pie li prema, o tochi ; 
E ’l ciel di vaghe, e lucide faville 
S’ accende intorno ; e’n vista si rallegra 


D esser fatto seren da st begli occhi. 


113 


SONNET XXVIII. 


Heng tarry, Love, our glory to behold ; 
Nought in creation so sublime we trace ; 
Ah, see what sweetness show's upon that face, 
What brightness to this earth the heav'ns unfold! 
See, with what cunning, crimson, pearls and gold, 
Her chosen vest, ne’er yet seen elsewhere, grace : 
Mid the hills’ arching shades observe her pace, 
Her glance replete with elegance untold! 
The variegated flow’rs, the verdant blade, 
That grow beneath yon aged holm-oak’s gloom, 
Court her fair feet to press them, and to tread ; 
The golden stars that stud yon beauteous sky, 


Cheer'd by her presence, and her smiles, assume 


Superior lustre, and serenity. 


114 


SONETTO XXIX. 
161. 


Te avra gentil, che rasserena i poggt 
Destando i _fior per questo ombroso bosco, 
Al soave suo spirto riconosco ; 

Per cui conven che ’n pena, e'n fama poggi. 

Per ritrovar ove ’l cor lasso appoggi, 

Fuggo dal mio natio dolce aere Tosco: 
Per far lume al pensier torbido, e fosco, 
Cerco’'l mio sole ; e spero vederlo oggi: 

Nel qual provo dolcezze tante, e tali, 
Ch’ Amor per forza a lui mi riconduce ; 
Pot si m abbagha, che’l fuggir m é tardo. 

fo chiedere’ a scampar non arme, anzi ali: 
Ma perir mi da ’l ciel per questa luce ; 


Che da lunge mi struggo, e da press’ ardo. 


115 


SONNET XXIX. 


Tus gale, that oer yon hills flings softer blue, 
And wakes to lite each bud that gems the glade, 
I know; its breathings such impression made, 
Wafting me fame, but wafting sorrow too: 
My wearied soul to sooth, I bid adieu 
To those dear Tuscan haunts I first survey’d ; 
And, to dispel the gloom around me spread, 
I hope this day my cheering sun to view : 
Whose sweet attraction is so strong, so great, 
That Love again compels me to its light ; 
Then he so dazzles me, that vain were flight. 
Not arms to brave, ’tis wings to scape my fate 
I ask; but by those beams I'm doom’d to die,« 


When distant which consume, and which enflame when nis 


116 


SONETTO XXX. 
163. 


LL? avna serena, che fra verdi fronde 
Mormorando a ferir nel volto viemme, 
Fammi risovvenir quand’ Amor diemme 
Le prime piaghe si dolct, e profonde ; 

E '1 bel viso veder ch altri m asconde, 
Che sdegno, o gelosia celato tiemme ; 

E le chiome or avvolte in perle, e’n gemme, 
Allora sciolte, e sovra or terso bionde: 
Le quali ella spargea si dolcemente, 
E raccoghea con si leggiadrt mod, 
Che ripensando ancor trema la mente. 

Torsele tl tempo po in piu saldi nodi ; 

EF strinse l cor d’ un laccio si possente, 


Che morte sola fia ch’ indi lo snodi. 


117 


SONNET XXX. 


Tue gentle gale, that plays my face around, 
Murm'ring delightful through the verdant grove, 
To fond remembrance brings the time, when Love 
First gave his deep, although delightful wound ; 

Gave me to view that beauteous face, ne’er found 
Veild, as disdain, or jealousy might move ; 

To view her locks that shone bright gold above, 
Then loose, but now with pearls and jewels bound : 

Those locks she sweetly scatter'd to the wind, 
And then coil’d up again so gracefully, 

That but to think on it still thrills the sense. 

These time has in more sober braids confin‘d ; 
And bound my heart with such a pow'rful tie, 


That death alone can disengage it thence. 


118 


SONETTO XXXI. 
165. 


DD aura soave, ch al sol spiega, e vibra 
L’ auro, ch’ Amor di sua man fila, e tesse ; 
La da begh occhi, e dalle chiome stesse 
Lega’! cor lasso, e i levi spirti cribra. 
Non ho medolla in osso, 0 sangue in fibra, 
Ch? non senta tremar ; pur ch’ v m’ appresse 
Dov’ é chi morte, e vita insieme spesse 
Volte in frale bilancia appende, e hora ; 
Vedendo arder i lumi ond 10 m accendo ; 
E folgorar i nodi ond’ io son preso, 
Or sul’ omero destro, ed or sul manco. 
I nol posso ridir ; che nol comprendo: 
Da ta’ due luci é U intelletto offeso, 


E di tanta dolcezza oppresso, e stanco. 


119 


SONNET XXXI. 


Tue pleasant gale, that to the sun unplaits 
And spreads the gold Love's fingers weave, and braid 
O’er her fine eyes, and all around her head, 
Fetters my heart, the wishful sigh creates : 
No nerve but thrills, no artery but beats, 
Approaching my fair arbiter with dread, 
Who in her doubtful scale hath oftimes weigh’d 
Whether or death, or life on me awaits ; 
Beholding too those eyes their fires display, 
And on those shoulders shine such wreaths of hair, 
Whose witching tangles my poor heart ensnare. 
But how this magic’s wrought I cannot say ; 
For twofold radiance doth my reason blind, 


And sweetness to excess palls, and o’erpow'rs my mind. 


120 


SONETTO XXXII. 
166. 


O seit man, che mi distringt ’l core, 
E'’n poco spazio la mia vita chiudi ; 
Maw ov’ ogni arte, e tutti loro studi 
Poser natura, e’l ciel, per farst onore ; 

Di cingue perle oriental colore, 

E sol nelle mie piaghe acerbi, e crud, 
Diti schietti soavi ; a tempo ignudi 
_ Consente or voi, per arricchirmi Amore. 

Candido, leggiadretto, e caro guanto, 
Che copria netto avorio, e fresche rose ; 
Chi vide al mondo mai si dolct spoglie ? 

Cosi avess’ 10 del bel velo altrettanto. 

O incostanza dell’ umane cose ! 


Pur questo ¢ furto; e vien ch’? me ne spoglie. 


121 


SONNET XXXII. 


O seavrteous hand, that dost my heart subdue, 
And in a little space my life confine ; 
Hand where their skill, and utmost efforts join 
Nature, and heavn their plastic pow’rs to shew 
Sweet fingers, seeming pearls of orient hue, 
To my wounds only cruel, fingers fine ! | 
Love, who towards me kindness doth design, 
For once permits ye naked to our view. 
Thou glove most dear, most elegant, and white, 
Encasing ivry tinted with the rose ; 
More precious cov ring ne'er met mortal sight ! 
Would I such portion of thy veil had gain‘d ! 


O fleeting gifts which fortune’s hand bestows ! 


’Tis justice to restore what theft alone obtain‘d. 


122 


SONETTO XXXITI. 
170. 


L 4550, ch’ v ardo, ed altri non me ’l crede : 
S? crede ogni uom, se non sola colei, 
Che sovr ogni altra, e ch’ v sola vorrei: 
Ella non par che ’l creda, e si se 'l vede: 
Infinita bellezza, e poca fede, 
Non vedete vot ’l cor negli occht miei ? 
Se non fosse mia stella, i’ pur devret 
Al fonte di pieta trovar mercede. 
Quest’ arder mio, di che vt cal st poco, 
Et vostri onori in mie rime diffusi 
Ne porian infiammar fors’ ancor mille : 
Ch v veggio nel pensier, dolce mio foco, 
Fredda una lingua, e duo begli occhi chiusi 


Rimaner dopo not pien di faville. 


123 


SONNET XXXII. 


Atas, with ardour past belief I glow! 

None doubt this truth, except one only fair, 
Who all excels, for whom alone I care; 
She plainly sees, yet disbelicves my woe. 

Q, poor in faith, but rich in charms! canst thou 
Look in these eyes, nor read my whole heart there ? 
Were I not fated by my baleful star, 

For me from pity’s fount might favour flow. 

My flame, of which thou tak’st so little heed, 

And thy high praises pour’d through all my song, 
O’er many a breast may future influence spread : 

These, my sweet fair, so warns prophetic thought, 
Clos'd thy bright eye, and mute thy poet's tongue, 
Een after death shall still with sparks be fraught. 


124 


SONETTO XXXIV. 


172. 


Doxcr ire, dolci sdegni, e dotci paci, 
Dolce mal, dolce affanno, e dolce peso, 
Dolce parlar, e dolcemente inteso, 
Or di dolce 6ra, or pien di dolci faci. 
Alma, non ti lagnar: ma soffri, e taci ; 
E tempra il dolce amaro che n’ ha offeso, 
Col dolce onor che @ amar quella hai preso, 
A cu to dissi; “‘ Tu sola mi piact.”’ , 
Forse ancor fia, chi sospirando dica 
Tinto di dolce invidia ; ** Assai sostenne 
“* Per bellissimo amor quest’ al suo tempo.” 
Altri; “O fortuna a gli occhi miei nemica 
“* Perché non la vid 10? Perché non venne 


“* Ella piu tardi, ovver’ to piu per tempo 2?” 


195 


SONNET XXXIV. 


Swe scorn, sweet anger, and swect misery, 
Forgiveness sweet, sweet burden, and sweet ill; 
Swect accents that mine ear so sweetly thrill, 
That sweetly bland, now swectly fierce can be. 

Mourn not, my soul, but sutfer silently ; 

And those embitter'd swects your heart that fill 

With the sweet honour blend of loving still 

Her whom I told: “ Thou only pleasest me.” 
Mov'd with swect envy, haply some may say : 

‘‘ For that high-boasted beauty of his day 

‘“ Enough the bard has borne!” then heave a sigh. 

While some exclaim: “ O, hostile fortune, why 
“* Could not these eyes that lovely form survey , 


“Why was she early born, or wherefore late was I: 


126 


SONETTO XXXV. 
173. 


Rarprvo Jiume, che d’ alpestra vena 
Rodendo intorne, onde ’l tuo nome prendi, 
Notte, e di meco desioso scendz 
Ov’ amor me, te sol natura mena ; 

Vattene innanzi: il tuo corso non frena 
Ne stanchezza, né sonno: e pria che rendi 
Suo dritto al mar ; fiso, u’ st mostri, attendi 
L? erba piu verde, ’ aria piu serena : 

Lot & quel nostro vive, e dolce sole 
Ch’ adorna, e ’rfiora la tua riva manca: 
Forse, O che spero! il mio tardar le dole. 

Baciale 'l piede, o la man bella, e bianca: 
Dille : tl baciar sie ’n cece di parole : 


Lo spirto 2 pronto, ma la carne é stanca. 


127 


SONNET XXXV. 


Iurervous flood, that from the Alps’ rude head, 
Eating around thee, dost thy name obtain ; 
Anxious like me both night, and day to gain 
Where thee pure nature, and me love doth lead ; 
Pour on: thy course nor sleep, nor toils impede; 
Yet, ere thou pay’st thy tribute to the main, 
O tarry where most verdant looks the plain, 
Where most serenity the skics doth spread ! 
There beams my radiant sun of checring ray, 
Which decks thy left banks, and gems o'er with flow's; 
E’en now, vain thought! perhaps she chides my stay : 
Kiss then her feet, her hand so beauteous fair ; 
In place of language let thy kiss declare 


Strong is my will, though feeble are my pow’rs. 


128 


SONETTO XXXVI. 
178. 


Grazie, ch’ a pochi ’l ciel largo destina: 
Rara vertu, non gid d’ umana gente: 
Sotto bondi capei canuta mente ; 

EF” n uml donna alta belta divina : 

Leggiadria singulare, e pellegrina ; 

El cantar che nel? anima si sente: 
LT? andar celeste ; el 'vago spirto ardente, 
Ci ogni dur rompe, ed ogni altezza wchina. 

E que’ begl occhi, che i cor fanno smalti, 
Possentt a rischiarar abisso e notti, 

E torre ? alme a’ corpi, e darle altrui ; 

Col dir pien d’ intelletti dolci, ed alti ; 

Cot sospir soavemente rotti: 


Da questi magi trasformato fui. 
‘ 


129 


SONNET XXXVI. 


Graces, that lib’ral heav’n on few bestows ; 

Rare excellence, scarce known to human kind : 

With youth’s bright locks age’s ripe judgment join d ; 

Celestial charms, which a meek mortal shows; 
An elegance unmatch’d ; and lips, whence flows 

Musick that can the sense in fetters bind ; 

A goddess step; a lovely glowing mind, 

That breaks the stubborn, and the haughty bows ; 
Eyes, whose refulgence petrifies the heart, 

To glooms, to shades that can a light impart, 

Lift high the lover’s soul, or plunge it low ; 
Speech link’d by tenderness and dignity ; 

With many a sweetly-interrupted sigh ; ; 


Work the strong witchcrafts that transform me so. 


130 


SONETTO XXXVITI. 
183. 


Ti cantar novo, e’l pranger degli augell 
In sul di fanno risentir le valli, 
E ’l mormorar de’ liquide cristalli 
Git per lucidi freschi rivi, e snelli. 
Quella, c’ ha neve ql volte, oro i capelli ; 
Nel cui amor non fur mai inganni, née falli ; 
Destami al suon degli amorosi balli, 
Petiinando al suo vecchio 1 bianchi vel. 
Cos) mi soeglio a salutar I aurora, 
E’l sol, ch’ 2 seco, e pit V altro, ond’ to fui 
Ne’ prim’ anni abbaggliato, ¢ sono ancora. 
I’ gli ho veduti aleun giorno ambedui 
Levarsi insieme ; ¢'n ur punto, e’nun’ ora, 
Qual, far la stelle, ¢ questo sparir lus. 


131 


SONNET XXXVII. 


Tue birds’ sweet wail, their renovated song, 

At break of morn, make all the vales resound ; 
With lapse of crystal waters pouring round, 
In clear swift runnels, the fresh shores among. 

She, whose pure passion knows nor guile nor wrong, 
With front of snow, with golden tresses crown’d, 
Combing her aged husband's hoar locks found, 
Wakes me when sportful wakes the warbling throng. 

Thus, rous’d from sleep, I greet the dawning day, 
And its succeeding sun, with one more bright, 
Still dazzling, as in early youth, my sight : 

Both suns I’ve seen at once uplift their ray; 
This drives the radiance of the stars away, 
But that whieh gilds my life ectipses eens his hight. 


132 


SONETTO XXXVIII. 
184. 


Onone tolse Amor V’ oro, ¢ di qual vena, 
Per far due treccie bionde? e ’n quali spine 
Colse le rose? e’n qual piaggia le brine 
Tenerc, e fresche ; e die lor polso, e lena? 
Onde le perle, in ch’ ei frange, ed affrena 
Dolci parole, oneste, e pellegrine ? 
Onde tante bellezze, e si divine 
Di quella fronte piu che 'l ciel serena? 
Da quali angeli mosse, e di qual spera 
Quel celeste cantar che mi aisface 
Si, che m avanza omai da disfar poco ¢ 
Di qual sol nacque ? alma luce altera 
Di que’ begli occht, ond’ a’ ho guerra, e pace; 


Che mi cuocono ’l cor in ghiaccio, e’n foco? 
3 


133 


SONNET XXXVI. 


Wuence could Love take the gold, and from what vein, 
To form those bright twin locks? What thorn could grow 
Those roses? And what mead that white bestow 
Of the fresh dews, which pulse and breath obtain ? 

Whence came those pearls that modestly restrain 
Accents which courteous, sweet, and rare can flow ? 
And whence those charms, that so divinely show, 
Spread o’cr a face serene as heav’n’s blue plain ? 

Taught by what angel, or what tuneful sphere, 

Was that celestial song, which doth dispense 
Such potent magick to the ravish’d ear? 

What sun illum’d those bright commanding eyes, 

Which now look peaceful, now in hostile guige ; 


Now torture me with hope, and now with fear ? 


1354 


SONETTO XXXIX. 
187. 


Quvanvo’l sol bagna in mar Ll’ aurato carro ; 
E l’ aer nostro, ¢ la mia mente imbruna ; 
Col cielo, é con le stelle, ¢ con la luna 
Un’ angosciosa, e dura notte wnarro: 

Poi, lasso, a tal che non m ascolta, narro 
Tutte le mie fatiche ad una ad una ; 

E col mondo, e con mia cieca fortuna, 
Con amor, con madonna, e meco garro. 

Tl somno &’n bando, e del riposo é nulla ; 
Ma sospiri, ¢ lamenti infin’ al? alba, 

E lagrime, che ?’ alma @ gli occhi invia. 

Vien pol’ aurora, ¢ P aura fosca inalba : 
Me po; ma’l sol che 'l cor m arde, e trastulla, 
Quel pud sela addoleir le dogha mia. 


1$5 


SONNET XXXIX. 


Wuen sinks in ocean the sun’s golden wain, 
And my mind darkens, and th’ expanse of air ; 
Soon beam in heav’n the moon, afd each bright star, 
My nightly earnest of approaching pain: 
I then recount, ah wretched me! in vain 
To the unpitying deaf cach am rous care; 
Of love, of wayward fortune, of my fair, 
Of the whole world, and of myself I plain. 
I know not rest ; my couch soft slumber files: 
I wail, I sigh, and till the dawn shed tears 
Forc'd from my sad soul through my streaming eyes. 
Then the dun sky morn gilds with cheerfal light, 
But glads not me, Tis but one sun that cheers 
My life, and renders all its prospects bright. 


136 


SONETTO XL. 
188. 


S "UNA Sede amorosa, un cor non finto, 
Un languir dolce, un destar cortese ; 
S’ oneste voglie in gentil foco accese ; 
S" un lungo error’ in cieco laberinto ; 

Se nella fronte ogni pensier dipinto, 

Od in voci interrotte appena intese, 
Or da paura, or da vergogna offese ; 
S’ un pallor di viola, e d’ amor tinto ; 

S’ aver altrui piu caro, che sé stesso; 

Se lagrimar, e sospirar mat sempre ; 
Pascendosi di duol, d ira, e d’ affanno ; 
S’ arder da lunge, ed agghwacciar da presso, 

Son le cagion ch’ amando v’ mi distempre ; 


Vostre, donna, *l peccato, e mio fia ’l danno. 


137 


SONNET XL. 


Ir faith impassion’d, and a heart sincere ; 
If tender languishment, and chaste desire ; 
Wishing what only modest hopes require ; 
And wand’ring long through passion’s maze with fear ; 
If on the brow each thought be pictur’d clear ; 
If words half-utter'd from the tongue retire, 
As apprehension, or as shame inspire ; 
If on the cheek the violet’s hue to wear ; 
If dearer than oneself another prove ; 
If constantly to weep, as much to sigh, 
Nursing the pangs, the griefs, the wrath of love ; 
To burn when distant, and to freeze when nigh ; 
If such fond causes doom me to despair, 


Though death be mine, thine is the guilt, my fair! 


138 


SONETTO XLI. 
191. 


Avra, che quelle chiome bionde, ¢ crespe 
Circondi, e movi, e se’ mossa da loro 
Soavemente, e spargi quel dolce oro, 

E poi ’l raccogli, e’n bei nodi'l rincrespe ; 

Tu stai negli occhi ond amorose vespe 
Mi pungon si, che ’n fin gua ui sento, € ploro, 
E vacillando cerco il mio tesoro, 

Com’ animal che spesso adombre, e ‘ncespe : 

Ch or mel par ritrovar ; ed or m’ accorgo, 

Ch’ i? ne son lunge: or mi sollevo ; or caggio ; 
Ch or quel ch i’ bramo, or quel ch’ é vero, scorgo. 

Aer felice, col bel vivo raggio 

Rimanti: e tu corrente, e chiaro gergo, 


‘ Che non poss’ io oangiar teco viaggio? 


139 


SONNET XLII 


Trou gale, that movest, and disportest round 
Those bright crisp’d locks, by them mov’d sweetly too, 
That all their fine gold scatter’st to the view, 
Then coil’st them up in beauteous braids fresh wound ; 
About those eyes thou playest, where abound 
The am’rous swarms, whose stings my tears renew ; 
And I my treasure tremblingly pursue, 
Like some scar’d thing that stumbles o’er the ground. 
Methinks I find her now, and now perceive 
She’s distant; now I soar, and now descend ; 
Now what I wish, now what is true believe. 
Stay and enjoy, blest air, the living beam ; 
And thou, O rapid, and translucent stream, , 


Why can’t I change my course, and thine attend: 


140 


CANZONE VIII. 
37. 


Now ha tanti animali il mar fra Tl onde ; 
Ne lassu sopra’ cerchio della luna 
Vide mai tante stelle alcuna notte ; 
Ne tanti augelli albergan per li boschi; 
Ne tant’ erbe ebbe mai campo, née piaggia ; 


Quant’ ha ’l mio cor pensier ciascuna sera. 


Di di in di spero omai T ultima sera, 
Che scevri in me dal vivo terren I’ onde, 
E mi lasci dormir in qualche piaggia: 
Che tanti affanm uom mai sotto la luna 
Non sofferse, quant’ io: sdnnolsi i boschi, 


Che sol vo ricercando giorno, e notte. 


141 


ODE VIII. 


Counr the ocean’s finny droves ; 
Count the twinkling host of stars, 
Round the night’s pale orb that moves ; 
Count the groves’ wing’d choristers ; 
Count each verdant blade that grows ; 


Counted then will be my woes. 


When shall these cyes cease to weep ; 
When shall this world-wearied frame, 
Cover'd by the cold sod, sleep r— 
Sure, beneath yon planet’s beam, 
None like me have made such moan ; 


This to ev'ry bow’r 1s known. 


142 


I non ebbi giammai tranquilla notte : 
Ma sospirando andai mattine, e sera ; 
Poi ch’ amor femmi un cittadin de’ boscht. 
Ben fia in prima, cl’? post, il mar senz’ onde ; 
E la sua luce avra'l sol dalla luna ; 


E i for @’ april morranno in ogni piaggia. 


Consumando mi vo di piaggia in piaggia 
Il di pensoso ; pot piango la notte ; 
Ne stato ho mai, se non quanto la buna. 
Ratto, come imbrunir veggio la serra, 
Sospir del petto, e degli occhi escon’ onde, 


Da bagnar ? erbe, ¢ da crallare i boschi. 


148 


Sad my nights; from morn till eve, 
Tenanting the woods, I sigh: 

But, ere I shall cease to grieve, 
Ocean’s vast bed shall be dry, 

Suns their light from moons shall gain, 


And spring wither on each plain. 


Pensive, weeping, night and day, 
From this shore to that I fly, 
Changeful as the lunar ray ; 
And, when ev’ning veils the sky, 
Then my tears might swell the floods, 
Then my sighs might bow the woods ! 


144 


Le citta son nemiche, amici i boschi 
A’ miei pensier, che per quest’ alta fraggia 
Sfogando vo col mormorar dell’ onde 
Per lo dolce silenzio della notte, 
Tal, ch’ io aspetto tutto ’l di la sera, 


Che ’l sol si parta, e dia luogo alla luna. 


Deh, or foss’ io col Pago della luna 
Addormentato in qualche verdi boschi ; 
E questa ch’ anzi vespro a me fa sera, 
Con essa, e con Amor’ in quella piaggia 
Sola venisse a stars’ tvi una notte ; 


E ’l di si stesse, el sol sempre nell’ onde. 


Towns I hate,. the shades § love; 
For relief to yon green height, 

Where the rill resounds, I rove 
At the grateful calm of night; 

There I wait the day’s decline, 


For the welcome moon to shine. 


O, that in some lone retreat, 
Like Endymion I were lain ; 
And that she, who rules my fate, 
There one night to stay would deign ; 
Never from his billowy bed 
More might Phoebus lift his head! 


146 


Sovra dure onde al lume della Luna, 
Canzon, nata di notte in mezzo tz bosch, 


Ricca piaggia vedrai diman da sera. 


147 


Song, that on the wood-hung stream 
In the silent hour wert born, 
Witness’d but by Cynthia's beam, 
Soon as breaks to-morrow’s morn, 
Thou shalt seek a glorious plain, 


There with Laura to remain ! 


148 


SONETTO XLII. 
211, 


Qu.11 paura ho, quando mi torna a mente 
Quel giorno, ch’ i’ lasctai grave, e pensosa 
Madonna, ec’! mio cor seco: e non é cosa 
Che st volentier pensi, e si sovente. 

I la riveggio starsi umilmente 
Tra belle donne, a guisa d’ una rosa 
Tra minor fior, ne lieta, ne dogliosa ; 
Come chi teme, ed altro mal non sente. 

Deposta avea U usata leggiadria, 

Le perle, e le ghirlande, ei panni allegri, 
E ’l riso, e’l canto, el parlar dolce umano. 

Cost in dubbio lasciai la vita mia: 

Or tristt auguri, e sogni, e pensier negri 


Mi danno assalio ; e paccia a dio, che’n vano?t 


149 


SONNET XLII. 


Wuar dread I feel, when I revolve the day 
I left my mistress, sad, without repose, 
My heart too with her: and my fond thought knows 
Nought on which gladlier, oft’ner it can stay. 
Again my fancy doth her form portray 
Meek among beauty’s train, like to some rose 
Midst meaner flow’rs; nor joy, nor grief she shows ; 
Not with misfortune prest, but with dismay. 
Then were thrown by her custom’d cheerfulness, 
Her pearls, her chaplets, and her gay attire, 
Her song, her laughter, and her mild address ; 
Thus doubtingly I quitted her I love : 
Now dark ideas, dreams, and bodings dire 


Raise terrors, which heav’n grant may groundless prove! 


150 


SONETTO XLIII. 
221. 


Cercaro ho sempre solitaria vita, 
(Le rive il sanno, e le campagne, e 1 boschi) 
Per fuggir quest’ ingegni sordi, e loschi, 
Che la strada del ciel’ hanno smarrita : 
E se mia voglia in cid fosse compita, 
Fuor del dolce aere de’ paesi Toschi 
Ancor m acria tra suoi be’ colli foschi 
Sorga; ch’ a pianger, e cantar m aita. 
Ma mia fortuna a me sempre nemica 
Mi risospigne al loco, ov’ 10 mi sdegno 
Veder nel fango il bel tesoro mio: 
Alla man’, ond’ io scrivo, é fatta amica 
A questa volta: enon é forse tndegno : 


Amor sel vide, e sal Madonna, ed io. 


151 


SONNET XLIII. 


Stix have I sought a life of solitude ; 
The streams, the fields, the forests know my mind . 
That I might scape the sordid, and the blind, 
Who paths forsake trod by the wise, and good : 

Fain would I leave, were mine own will pursued, 
These Tuscan haunts, and these soft skics behind, 
Sorga’s thick-wooded hills again to find ; 

And sing, and weep in concert with its flood. 

But fortune, ever my sore enemy, 
Compels my steps, where I with sorrow see 
Cast my fair treasure in a vicious soil : 

Yet less a foe she justly deigns ta prove, 
For once, to me, to Laura, and to love ; 


Fav'ring my song, my passion with her smile, 


152 


SONETTO XLIV. 
228. 


Oxme il bel viso ; oime il soave sguardo ; 
Oime il leggiadro portamento altero ; 
Oimée ’l parlar, ch’ ogni aspro ingegno, e fero 
Faceva umile ; ed ogni uom vil, gaglardo ; 

Ed oimé il dolce riso, ond’ uscio ’l dardo 
Di che morte, altro bene omai non spero: 
Alma real, dignissima da’ impero, 

Se non fossi fra noi scesa s) tardo. 

Per voi conven ch’ io arda, én voi respire : 
Ch’ i’ pur fui vostro; e se di voi son privo, 
Via men a’ ogni sventura altra mi dole. 

Di speranza m'empieste, e di desire, 

Quaya’ to parti dal sommo piacer vivo : 


Ma *t vento ne portava le parole. 


153 


SONNET XLIV. 


Au me, that lovely look! that beauteous face ! 
That gay demeanor blent with dignity! 
That speech, which could the soul from discord free, 
And to ingenuous could convert the base! 

Ah me, that smile by which the dart took place, 
Whence death; nor hope I other destiny! 
Spirit, that worthy of a realm mightst be, 
Less late adorning our unworthy race ! 

For you I still will burn, for you respire ; 
Since yours through life I’ve been: of you depriv‘d, 
All other woe with patience I can bear. 

My soul you fill’d with hope, and with desire, 
When last to these delighted eyes you liv‘: 


But now those words are all dispers’d in air. 


154 


CANZONE IX. 
40. 


Cuz debb io far ; che mi consigh, Amore ? 
Tempo é ben di morire ; 
kd ho tardato pit, ch’ v non vorrei. 
Madonna é morta, ed ha seco’! mio core ; 
E volendol seguire, 
Interromper conven quest’ anni rei: 
Perché mat veder lei 
Di qua non spero, el aspettar m’ é noja, 
Poscia, ch’ ogni mia gioja 
Per lo suo dipartire in pianto é volta ; 


Ogni dolcezza di mia vita é tolta. 


155 


ODE Ix. 


Wauar should I do; what, Love, dost thou advise? 

Full time it is to die: 

And longer than I wish have I delay’d. 

My mistress is no more, and with her gone my heart; 
To follow her, I must need 

Break short the course of my afflictive years: 
To view her here below 

I ne’er can hope ; and irksome ’tis to wait. 
Since that my ev’ry Joy 

By her departure unto tears is turn’d ; 


Of all its sweets my life has been deprivd. 


156 


Amor, tu % senti, ond’ to teco mi dogho, 
‘Quant’ é °l danno aspro, e grave ; 

E so, che del mw mal ta pesa, e dole ; 
Anzi del nostro ; perch ad uno scoglo 
Avem rotto la nave: 

Ed in un punto n’ é scurato i sole. 

Qual’ ingegno a parole 

Poria agguaghar’ tl mio doglioso stato? 
Ahi orbo mondo ingrato, 

Gran cagiow hai di dever pianger meco ; 


Che quel ben, ch’ era in te, perdut’ hai seco. 


157 


Thou, Love, dost feel, therefore to thee I plain, 
How grievous is my loss ; 
I know my sorrows grieve, and weigh thee down ; 
F’en as our common cause: for on one rock 
We both have wreck’d our bark : 
And in one instant was its sun obscur’d. 
What genius can with words 
Rightly describe my lamentable state ¢ 
Ah, blind, ungrateful world, 
Thou hast indeed just cause with me to mourn ; 


That beauty, thou didst hold, with her is fled! 


158° 


Caduta é la tua gloria; e tu nol vedi ; 
Ne degno eri mentr’ ella 
Visse quaggiu, d aver sua conoscenza, 
Ne ad’ esser tocco da’ sui santi piedi: 
Perché cosa si bella 
Devea’l ciel? adornar di sua presenza. 
Ma 10, lasso, che senza 
Lei ne vita mortal, né me stess’ amo ; 
Piangendo la richiamo: 
Questo m’ avanza dt cotanta spene ; 


E questo solo ancor qui mi mantene. 


159 


Fall’n is thy glory, and thou see’st it not; 
Unworthy thou with her, 
While here she dwelt, acquaintance to maintain, 
Or to be trodden by her saintly feet : 
For that, which is so fair, 
Should with its presence decorate the skies. 
But I, a wretch who, reft 
Of her, prize nor myself, nor mortal life, 
Recall her with my tears : 
This only of my hope’s vast sum remains ; 


And this alone doth still support me here. 


160 


Oime, terra é fatto tl suo bel vtso, 
Che solea far del cielo, 
E del ben di lassi fede fra noi. 
L? invisibil sua forma é in paradiso 
Disciolta di quel velo, 
Che qui fece ombra al for deglt anni suoi, 
Per rivestirsen pot ) 
Un’ altra volta, e mat piu non spoglarse ; 
Quand’ alma, e bella farsi 
Tanto piu la vedrem, quanto piu vale 


Sempiterna bellezza, che mortale. 


161 


Ah me, her charming face is earth become, 

Which wont unto our thought 

To picture heav'n, and happiness above ! 

Her viewless form inhabits paradise, 
Divested of that veil, 

Which shadow’d while below her bloom of life, 
Once more to put it on, 

And never then to cast it off again ; 
When so much more divine, 

And glorious render’d *twill by us be view d, 


As mortal beauty to eternal yields. 


162 


Pitt che mai bella, e piu leggiadra donna 
Tornami innanzi, come 
La, dove pit gradir sua vista sente. 
Quest’ é del viver mio 1’ una colonna: 
Paltra é’l suo chiaro nome, 
Che sona nel mio cor si dolcemente. 
Ma tornandomi a mente, 
Che pur morta é la mia speranza viva 
Allor, ch ella fiorvva ; 
Sa ben’ Amor, qual’ io divento ; e spero 


Vedal colei, ch’ é or si presso al vero. 


163 


More bright than ever, and a lovelier fair, 

Before me she appears, 

Where most she’s conscious that her sight will plea 

This is one pillar that sustains my life ; 
The other her dear naine, 

That to iny heart sounds so delightfully. 
But tracing in my mind, 

That she who form’d my choicest hope is dead 
Een in her blossom’d prime ; 

Thou knowest, Love, full well what I become : 


She I trust sces.it too, who dwells with truth. 


164 


Donne, voi che miraste sua beltate, 
LLP angelica vita, 
Con quel celeste portamento in terra ; 
Di me vi dogha, e vincavi pietate, 
Non di lei, cl é salita 
A tanta pace, e me ha lasciato in guerra; 
Tal, che 8’ altri mi serra 
Lingo tempo il cammin da seguitarla ; 
Quel ch’ Amor meco parla, 
Sol mi riten ch’? io non recida il nodo: 


Ala € ragiona dentro in cotal modo: 


165 


Ye swect associates, who admird her charms, 

Her life angelical, 

And her demeanour heav’nly upon earth ; 

For inc lament, and be by pity wrought, 
No wise for her, who, ris‘n 

To so much peace, me has in wartare lett ; 
Such, that should any shut 

The road to follow her, for some length of tine ; 
What Love declares to me 

Alone would check iny cutting through the tie: 


But in this guise he reasons from w ithin. 


166 


“ Pon freno al gran dolor che ti trasporta; 
“ Che per soverchie voglie 
“* St perde *l cielo, ove l tuo core aspira; 
‘€ Dov’ é viva colet, ch’ altrui par morta ; 
“E di sue belle spoglhe 
*¢ Seco sorride ; e sol di te sospira ; 
“ E sua fama, che spira 
** In molte parti ancor per la tua lingua, 
“ Prega che non estingua ; 
‘© Anzi la voce al suo nome rischiari; 


Se gli occhi suoi ti fur dolci, né cari.” 


~ 


¢ 


~ 


¢ 


rn 
tay 


n~ 


¢ 


~ 


¢ 


¢ 


167 


‘¢ The mighty grief transporting thee restrain ; 
‘¢ For passions uncontroul’d 

Forfeit that heav’n, to which thy soul aspires, 

Where she ts living whom some fancy dead ; 
“ While at her fair remains 

She smiles herself, sighing for thee alone ; 
‘¢ And that her fame, which lives 

In many a clime hymmd by thy tongue, nay ne’ 
‘“ Become extinct, she prays ; 

But that her name should harmonize thy voice ; 


If e’er her eyes were lovely held, and dear.” 


168 


Fuggi ’l sereno, el verde ; 
Non t’ appressar ove sia riso, 0 canto, 
Canzon mia nd, ma pianto: . 
Non fa per te di star fra gente allegra, 


Vedova sconsolata in vesta negra. 


169 


Fly the calm, green retreat ; 

And neer approach where song, and laughter dwell, 
O strain; but wail be thine! 

It suits thee ill with the glad throng to stay, 


Thou sorrowing widow wrapt in garb of woe. 


170 


SONETTO XLV. 


229. 


Rorra el alta Colonna, el verde Lauro, 
Che facean ombra al mio stanco pensero: 
Perdut’ ho quel che ritrovar non spero 
Dal Borea all’ Austro, 6 dal mar’ Indo al Mauro. 

Tolto m’ hai, morte, il mio doppio tesauro, 
Che mi_fea civer leto, e gire altero ; 

E ristorar nol puo terra, né impero, 
Ne gemma oriental, née forza d’ auro. 

Ja se consentimento ¢ di destino ; 

Che poss’ to pit, se no aver U alma trista, 
U'midi gli occhi sempre, e ‘liso chino ; 

O nostra vita, ch ¢ si bella in tista ; 

Com’perde agevolmente in un mattino 


Quel, che 'n molt’ anni a gran pena s acquista! 


171 


SONNET XLV. 


Fax’ that proud Column, fall’n that Laurel tree, 
Whose shelter once relieved my wearied mind ; 
Im reft of what T ne‘er again shall find, 

Though ransack’d every shore, and ev'ry sea: 

Double the treasure death has torn from me, 

In which life's pride was with its pleasure join’d ; 
Not eastern gems, nor the world’s wealth combin’c 
Can give it back, nor land, nor royalty, 

But, 1f so fate decrees, what can I more, 

Than with unceasing tears these eyes bedew, 
Abase my visage, and my lot deplore ? 

Ah, what ts life so lovely to the view! 

How quickly in one little morn is lost ° 


What years have won with labour, and with cost. 


172 


SONETTO XLVI. 
230. 


DP anvexre nodo, ov io Jui @ ora in ora 
Contando anni ventuno interi preso, 
forte disciolse: née gidmmai tal peso 
Provai: né credo ch’ uom di dolor mora. 

Non volendomi Amor perder ancora, 

Libbe uw altro lacciuol fra U erba teso, 
E di nov’ esca wv altro foco acceso, 
Tal, ch’ a gran pena indi scampato fora : 

E se non Josse esperiensa molta 
De primi affanni, ? sarei preso, ed arso, 
Tunto pit, quanto son men verde legno: 

Morte m ha liberato uw altra volta, 

E rotto ’l nodo ; e’l foco ha spento, e sparso, 


Contra la qual non val forza, née 'ngegno. 


SONNET ALVI. 


Tuat burning toil, in which T once was caught, 
While twice ten years and one I counted o'er, 
Death has unloos’d: like burden I ne’er bore : 
That grief ne’cr fatal proves I now ain taughit. 

But Love, who to entangle me still sought, 

Spread in the treach’rous ¢rass his net once more, 
So fed the fue with fuel as before, 
That my escape [hardly could have wrought. 

And, but that iny first woes experience gave, 

Snared long since, and kindled IT liad been, 
And all the more, as Pin becote less green : 

My freedom death again las come to save, 

And break iny bond; that flame now fades, ayd fa 


’°Gainst which nor force, nor intcllect prevails. 


174 


SONETTO XLVITI. 


231. 


Lia vita Jugge, enon § arresta un’ ora ; 
E la morte vien dietro a gran giornate ; 
E le cose presenti, e le passate 
Mi danno guerra, e le future ancora ; 

El rimembrar, el’ aspettar m’ accora 
Or quinci, or quindi st, che’n veritate, 
Se non ch’ ? ho di me stesso pietate, 

I’ sarei gia di questi pensier fora. 

Tornami avanti, 8 alcun dolce mai 
Ebbe ‘lcor triste; e pot dal? altra parte 
Veggio al mio nacigar turbatii venti: 

Veggio fortuna in porto; e stanco omai 

Ll mie nocchier’; e rotte arbore, e sarte ; 


£ i lumi bei, che mirar soglio, spenti. 


175 


SONNET XLVIL 


Lire flies apace, and tarnes not an hour ; 
While death behind with huge stride journeys on: 
Events now present, with those past and gone, 
And all the future too, my life doth sour. 

Remembrance, and expectancy so low’r 
By turns upon my mind; i truth I own, 
From such reflections I perforce had flown, 
But that self-pity doth my will o’erpowr. 

If aught of joy this sadden’d heart c’cr knew, 

It starts on fancy: but beside yon coast 
By boist'rous winds I see my vessel tost. 

Good-fortune’s wish’d-for port is now in view ; 

My pilot's wearied ; rent my mast, and sail ; . 


And those fair lights, that guided once, now fail. 


176 


SONETTO XLVIII. 
238. 


Se lamentar augelli, o verdi fronde 
Afover soavemente all’ aura estiva, 
O roco mormorar di lucid’ onde 
S” ode d’ una fiorita, e fresca riva ; 
La’v to segeia d amor pensoso, e scriva ; 
Lei che’l ciel ne monstro, terra wv asconde, 
Peco, ed odo, ed intendo: ch ancor viva 
Di si lontano @ sospir miei risponde. 
‘* Deh perche innanzi tempo tt consume 2” 
Ali dice con pietate: ‘© A che pur versi, 
“ Degh oechi tristi un doloroso frume ? 
Di me non pranger tu, che miei da fersi, 
“ Alorendo, eterni; e nell’ eterno lume, 


“ Quando mostrai di chiuder gli occhi, apersi.” 


77 


SONNET XLVIII. 


Ir in sweet accent moans the plaintive bird, 
Or green groves whisper soft in summer alr, 
Or from the fresh and flow’ry shore is heard 
Down the rock’s side the fall of waters fair, 
There where I sit, enditing midst fond care ; 
Then she, whom heav’n just shew’d us, now inte. 
Whom my fond senses living yet declare, 
Answers from skies above each sigh preferr’d. 
‘‘ Ah why to waste thy life untimely seek ?”’ 
With pity she exclaims: ‘‘ And wherefore flows 
“That flood of sorrow down thy faded cheek ¢ 
‘‘ Weep not for me; death made for ever bright 
“© My days; and, when these eyes appear’d te cl 
“ Then were they open’d in eternal light.” 


N 


178 


SONETTO XLIX. 
240. 


Quanrr frate al mio dolce ricetto 
Fuggendo altrui, e, 8° esser pud, me stesso, 
Vo con gli occhi bagnando I erba, e’l petto ; 
Rompendo co’ sospir l' aere da presso: 
Quante fiate sol pien di sospetto 
Per luoghi ombrosi, e foschi mi son messo, 
Cercando col pensier Ll’ alto diletto, 
Che morte ha tolto; ond’ to la chiamo spesso : 
Or in forma di ninfa, o d’ altra diva, 
Che del piu chiaro fondo di Sorga esca, 
E pongasi a seder in su la rvva ; 
Or l’ ho veduta su per l’ erba fresca 
Calcer i fior, com’ una donna ‘viva, 


Mostrando in vista, che di me le ’ncresca. 


179 


SONNET XLIX. 


How often to my sweet retreat I haste, 

To fly mankind, nay e’en myself to fly, 
Bathing with tears the green turf and my bre 
Rending the ambient air with many a sigh: 

How often, dreading aught that may molest, 
I've roamd to glooms and shades of privacy, 
Seeking the fair to fancy’s view confest, 
Snatch’d hence by death, death to whom oft 

Now like a naiad, or some form divine, 

From the translucent depth of Sorga sprung, 
And on its margin joying to recline, 

Have I beheld her; now, fresh meads among 
Treading the flowrets, like a moratl shing ; 
While on her bard a chiding glance she flung 

N 2 


180 


SONETTO L. 
244. 


IN mai pietosa madre al caro figlio, 
Ne donna accesa al suo sposo diletto 
Die con tanti sospir, con tal sospetto 
In dubbio stato si fedel consiglio ; 

Come a me quella, che ’l mio grave esiglo 
Mirando dal suo eterno alto ricetto, 
Spesso a me torna con Ll usato affetto, 

E di doppia pietate ornata il ciglio, 

Or ds madre, or d’ amante: or teme, or arde 
D’ onesto foco ; e nel parlar mi mostra 
Quel, che ’n questo viaggio fugga, o segua, 

Contando t casi de la vita nostra ; 
Pregando, ch al levar l’ alma non tarde: 


E sol quant’ ella parla, ho pace, o tregua. 


181 


SONNET L. 


Ne’sr did fond mother to her darling son, 
Or zealous spouse to her beloved mate 
Sage counsel give, in perilous cstate, 
With sach kind caution, in such tender tone, 
As gives that fair-one, who, oft looking down 
On my hard exe from her heav’nly seat, 
With wonted kindness bends upon my fate 
Her, brow, as friend or parent would have done : 
Now chaste affection prompts ler speech, now fear, 
Instructive speech, that points what sev’ral ways 
To scek, or shun, while journeying here below; 
Then all the ills of life she counts, and prays 
My soul ere long may quit thie terrene sphefe : 


And by her words alone I’m sooth’d, and freed from woe. 


182 


SONETTO LI. 
250. 


Qvanp’ io veggio dal ciel scender l’ Aurora 
Con la fronte di rose, e co’ crin d’ oro ; 
Amor m assale: ond’ io mi discoloro ; 
E dico sospirando: ‘ Ivi ¢ Laura ora.” 

O felice Titon, tu sai ben ora 
Da ricovrare il tuo caro tesora: 

Maza io che debbo far del dolce alloro ? 

Che se’l vo’ riveder, conven ch ito mora. 
T wostri dipartir non son si duri ; 

Ch’ almen di notte suol tornar colei, 

Che non ha schifo le tue bianche chiome : 

Le mie notti fa triste, e i giorni oscuri 
Quella, che n’ ha portato i pensier miei ; 


Ne di se m’ ha lasciato altro che ’l nome. 


183 


SONNET LI. 


When from the heav'ns I see Aurora beam, 
With rosy tinctur’d cheek, and golden hair ; 
Love bids my face the hue of sadness wear: 

“ There Laura dwells!’ I with a sigh exclaim. 

Thou knowest well the hour that shall redeem, 
Happy Tithonus, thy much valued fair ; 

But not to her | love can I repair, 
Till death extinguishes this vital flame. 

Yet need’st thou not thy separation mourn ; 
Certain at evening’s close is the return 
Of her, who doth not thy hoar locks despise : 

But my nights sad, my days are render‘d drear, 
By her, who bore my thoughts to yonder gkies, 


And only a remember’d name left here. 


184 


SONETTO LEI. 


251. 


G1 occhi di ch’ io parlai st caldamente ; 
E le braccia, e le mani, e 1 piedi, el viso, 
Che m’ avean si da me stesso diviso, 

E fatto singular dail’ altra gente ; 

Le crespe chiome d’ or puro lucente, 
El lampeggiar dell’ angelico riso, 
Che solean far in terra un paradiso ; 
Poca polvere son, che nulla sente : 

Ed to pur vivo: onde mi doglio, e sdegno ; 
Rimaso senza ’l lume, ch’ amai tanto, 
In gran fortuna, e’n disarmato legno. 

Or sia qui fine al mio amoroso canto: 
Secca ¢ la vena dell usato ingegno, 


E la cetera mia rivolta in pianto. 


185 


SONNET LI. 


Tiosz eyes, of which my song so warmly told ; 
Those arms, those hands, those feet, that face so fair, 
Which mine own nature from myself did tear, 
And made me scem as of peculiar mould ; 
Those crisped locks of pure, refulgent gold ; 
The glow that angel smile was wont to wear, 
Which made our earth a paradise appear ; 
Are turn’d to dust insensible, and cold: 
Still life, O grief! O shame! in me prevails ; 
‘Though dimin’d those orbs which did such joy bestow, 
Erewhile life's bark was sped by prosp’rous gales. 
Ah now no more my am’rous strain shall flow ; 
The custoin’d source of tuneful genius fails,, 


And my lyre utters only sounds of woe! 


186 


SONETTO LITI. 
258. 


Or’ 2 la fronte, che con picciol cenno 
Volgea ’l mio core in questa parte, e'n quella ? 
Ov é’l bel ciglio, el una, el’ altra stella, 
Ch’ al corso del mio viver lume denno ? 
Ov él valor, la conoscenza e 1 senno, 
I? accorta, onesta, umil, dolce favella ? 
Ove son le bellezze accolte in ella, 
Che gran tempo di me lor voglia fenno? 
Ov’ ¢ Lombra gentil del viso umano ; 
Ch’ ora, e riposo dava all’ alma stanca, 
E lave 1 miet pensier scritti eran tutte ? 
Ov’ é cole’, che mia vita ebbe in mano ? 
Quanto al misero mondo ; e quanto manca 


A gli occhi miei, che mai non fieno ascuitti. 


187 


SONNET LIII. 


Wuenrt is that countenance, whose slightest sign 
Could turn my casy heart now here, now there? 
Where those fine brows? Their orbs of radiance where, 
That on my being did so kindly shine ? 

Where now 1s worth, which sense and knowledge join ; 
That tender accent, modest, courteous, clear? 

Where those united graces which endear, 
And which long time to rule me did combine + 

Where now the temper’d scorn on beauty’s face, 
Which o’er my soul has cast a grateful gloom, 

When there my hopes, or fears I wont to trace? 

And where is she, whose charms have seal’d my doom r 
Ah what the loss this sad world must sustain, ® 


And these fond eyes that ne'er from weeping shall refrain! 


188 


SONETTO LIP. 


259. 


Quanra invidia ti porto, avara terra; 
Ch’ abbracci quella, cui veder m’ é tolto ; 
E mi contend lV’ aria del bel volto, 

Dove pace trovai d’ ogni mia guerra! 

Quanta ne porto al ciel, che chiude, e serra, 
E. si cupidamente ha in sé raccolto 
Lo spirto dalle belle membra sciolto ; 

E per altrui si rado si disserra! 

Quanta invidia a quell’ anime, che ’n sorte 
Hanw or sua santa, e dolce compagma ; 
La qual’ io cercat sempre con tal brama ! 

Quanta a la dispietata, e dura Morte ; 

Ch’ acendo spento in lei la vita mia, 


Stassi ne’ suoi begli occhi, e me non chiama ! 


189 


SONNET LIV. 


Waar envy do I bear thee, greedy clay ; 
Who dost her wrested from my sight embrace ; 
Dost with me too dispute that lovely face, 
Whose beauties chasd my warring woes away ! 
What do I bear the heav’ns, that fold, and stay, 
And midst themselves so eagerly could place 
That spirit freed from its fair mortal case ; 
Heav’ns, that to others rarely ope their way ! 
What envy bear those favourd souls, to whom 
Her sweet, and saiutly intercourse is known ; 
To which desirous long I made pretence ! 
What bear fell Death, remorseless in his doom ; 
Who, in her life extinguishing my own, 


Dwells in her beauteous cyes, nor deigns to call me hence! 


190 


SONETTO LV. 
260. 


V. ALLE, Che de’ lament miei se piena ; 
Fiume, che spesso del mio pianger cresci ; 
Fere silvestre, vaghi augelli, e pesci, 

Che ? una, eV altra verde riva affrena ; 

Aria de’ miei sospir calda, e serena ; 

Dolce sentier, che st amaro riesci ; 
Colle, che mi piacesti, or mi rincresci, 
Ov’ ancor per usanza Amor mi mena ; 

Ben riconosco in voi l’ usate forme, 

Non, lasso, in me; che da si lteta vita 
Son fatto albergo d’ infinita doglia. 

Quinci vedea *l mio bene ; e per quest’ orme 

Tarno a veder, ond al ciel nuda é gita 


Lasciando in terra la sua bella spoglia. 


191 


SONNET LV. 


Tuov vale, that with my plainings dost resound ; 
Thou stream, augmented oft with many a tear ; 
Ye wand'ring herds, ye wingcd tribes of air ; 

Ye finny droves, whom shores of verdure bound ; 

Warm’d by my sighs, thou heav’n that smilest round ; 
Thou path that lead’st no more to all that’s dear ; 
Thou once-lov'd hill, that now dost sad appear, 
Where, my accustom’d guide, Love still is found ; 

Your wonted forms full well again I know, 

But not mine own: this frame, so late th’ abode 
Of pleasure, now is tenanted by woe! 

I see, as from those tracks I bend mine eyes, 

Her, who on earth has cast her mortal load, 


And, an uncumber’d spirit, reacli'd the skies. 


‘192 


SONETTO LVN. 
261. 


Levommril mio pensier’ in parte, ov era 
Quella, ch’ 10 cerco, e non ritrovo in terra: 
Ivi fra lor, che ’l terzo cerchio serra, 

La rividi piu bella, e meno altera. 

Per man mi prese, e disse: “In questa spera 
‘© Sarai ancor meco, se ’*l desir non erra ; 
“ I’ son colei che ti die tanta guerra, 

‘“ E compte’ mia giornata innansi sera: 

‘© Mio ben non cape in tntelletto umano: 

“ Te solo aspetto; e quel, che tanto amastz, 

“ FE’ laggiuso é rimaso, wl mio bel velo.” 
Deh perché tacque, ed allargo la mano ? 

Che al suon de’ detti si pietosi, € casti, 


Poco mance ch io non rimasi in cielo. 


1938 


SONNET LVL. 


My fancy bore me to that region, where 
Dwells her I seek, on earth yet cannot find ; 
Again I saw her amid those, consign’d 
To the third heav’n, less haughty, and more fair. 
She took my hand, and thus did she declare : 
“Still shalt thou dwell with me, if hope prove kind ; 
“Twas I, who in such warfare held thy mind, 


‘“ Whose day was clos’d ere evening could appear : 


6 


“~ 


No human thought may scan the bliss I prove ; 
“T only wait for thee, and to resume 

“My fair veil cast on earth thou so didst love.” 
How could she quit my hand, why mute become? , 
For words thus chastely, pitcously exprest, 


Had nearly render'd me heay'n’s lasting guest. 


194 


SONETTO LVII, 
262. 


Amon, che meco al buon tempo ti stavi 
Fra queste rive a’ pensier nostri amiche ; 
E per saldar le ragion nostre antiche, 
Meco, e col fiume ragionando andati: 

Fior, frondt, erbe, ombre, antri, onde, aure soavi, 
Valli chiuse, alti collt, e piagge apriche, 
Porto dell’ amorose mie fatiche, 

Delle fortune mie tante, e st gravi: 

O vaghi abitator de verdi boschi ; 

O ninfe ; e voi, che ’l fresco erboso fondo 
Del liquido cristallo alberga, e pasce: 

L miei di fur st chiari ; or son st foschi ; 

Come morte, che’l fa, Cost nel mondo 


Sua ventura ha ciascun dal di che nasce. 


195 


SONNET LVIL. 


Tov Love, who these soul-friending banks beside 
In luckier times hast my companion been ; 

And, to discharge what former debts remain, 
Hast converse held with me, and with the tide! 

Ye flow'rs, soft airs, streams, verdures spreading wide, 
Ye grots, close vales, proud hills, and sunny plain, 
Who form the port my am’rous toils attain, 

Where my oppressive, num’rous sorrows hide! 

O sportful tenants of the leafy woods ! 

O naiad throng, and ye who batt’ning range 
In grassy cool depths of the crystal floods ! 

My days, so brilliant once, grow dark of late ; 

F’en dark as death, that wrought the cruel chatge.— 
Thus from our birth our beings have their fate. 


Oo 2 


196 


SONETTO LVITII. 
264. 


Anma, bella, da quel nodo sciolta, 
Che piu bel mai non seppe ordir natura, 
Pon dal cicl mente alla mia vita oscura 
Da si lieti pensicri a pianger volta. 
La falsa opinion dal cor 8° é tolta, 
Che mi fece alcun tempo acerba, e dura 
Tua dolce vista: omai tutta secura 
Volgt a me gl occhi, € i miei sospiri ascolta, 
Mira ’l gran sasso, donde Sorga nasce, 
E vedravi un, che sol tra V’ erbe, eV acque, 
Di tua memoria, e di dolor si pasce. 
Ove giace ’l tuo albergo, e dove nacque 
L' nostro amor, vo’ ch’ abbandoni, e lasce, 


Per non ceder né tuoi quel, ch a te spracque. 


197 


SONNET LVI. 


Bricur spirit, from those earthly bonds releasd, 
The loveliest ever wove in nature’s loom, 
From thy bright skies compassionate the gloom 
Shrouding my life that once of joy could taste! 
Fach false suggestion of thy heart has ceas‘d, 
That whilom bade thee stern disdain assume ; 
Now all secure, heav’n’s habitant become, 

List to my sighs, thy looks upon me cast. 
Mark the huge rock, whenee Sorga’s waters rise ; 
And see amidst its waves, and borders stray 
One fed by grief, and mem'ry that ne'er dies: 

But from that spot O turn thy sight away 
Where I first lov'd, where thy late dwelling lies: 


That in thy friends thou nought ungrateful mayst survey! 


198 


SONETTO LIX. 
269. 


SEFIRO torna, e’l bel tempo rimena, 
Ei fori, el erbe, sua dolce famigha ; 
E garrir Progne ; e pianger Filomena ; 
E primavera candida, e vermigla. 
Ridono i prati, e l ciel si rasserena ; 
Giove 8 allegra di mirar sua figlia: 
L’ aria, eV acqua, e la terra é d’ amor piena: 
Ogni animal @ amar si riconsigha. 
Ma per me, lasso, tornano t pit gract 
Sospiri, che del cor profondo tragge 
Quella, ch’ al ciel se ne porto le chiavi : 
E cantar augelletti, e forir piagge, 
E’n belle donne oneste atti soavi 


Sono un deserto, e fere aspre, e selvagge. 


199 


SONNET LIX. 


Zepuyn returns; and in his jocund train 
Brings verdure, flow'rs, and days serenely clear ; 
Brings Progne’s twitter, Philomel’s lorn strain, 
With ev'ry bloom that paints the vernal year : 

Cloudless the skies, and smiling ev'ry plain ; 

With joyance flush’d, Jove views his daughter dear ; 
Love's genial pow’r pervades carth, air, and main ; 
All beings join’d in fond accord appear. 

But nought to me returns save sorrowing sighs, 
Fore’d from my inmost heart by her who bore 
Those keys which govern’d it unto the skies : 

The blossom’d meads, the choristers of air, 

Sweet courteous damsels can delight no more; ® 


Each face looks savage, and each prospect drear. 


200 


SONETTO LX. 
270. 


Quex rosigniuol, che si soave piagne 
Forse suvi figl, o sua cara consorée, 
Di dolcezza empie i cielo, e le campagne 
Con tante note s? pictose, e scorte: 
E tutta notte par che m’ accompagne, 
E me rammente la mia dura sorte: 
Ch’ altri che me non ho, di cui mi lagne ; 
Che ’n dec non creder’ to regnasse morte. 
O che leve e ingannar, chi s’ assecura ! 
Que’ due ber lumi assai piu che 'l sol chiari 
Chi penso mat veder far terra oscura ? 
Or conosco io, che mia fera ventura 
Vuol, che vivendo, e lagrimando, impart 


Come nulla quaggiu diletta, e dura. 


201 


SONNET LX. 


Y on nightingale that pours forth tuneful wail 
For its dear mate, or haply for its young, 
Fills all the vaulted heav’n, and echoing dale 
With such sweet-modulated, plaintive song ; 
Methinks it joins ny melancholy tale, 
Reminding me of woc the whole night long: 
That death o’er charms divine could ne‘er prevail 
I ween'd, but now lament a thought so wrong, 
Who seeks security doth vainly stray : 
Ah me, that unto murky earth should turn 
Those eyes which far outshone the radiant day ! 
The precept my hard fortune would convey 
I now perceive; to live, to weep, and learn, 


Of ev'ry bliss below how transient is the stay. 


202 


SONETTO LX. 
271. 


INE per sereno ciel ’ir waghe stelle ; 
Ne per tranquillo mar legni spalmaizi ; 
Ne per campagne cavalieri armatt ; 
Ne per bei boschi allegre fere, e snelle ; 
Ne d aspettato ben fresche novelle ; 
Ne dir @ amore in stilt alti, ed ornati ; 
Né tra chiare fontane, e verdi prati 
Dolce cantare oneste donne, e belte ; 
Ne altro sara mai, ch al cor m aggwunga ; 
Si? seco il seppe quella seppellire, 
Che sola a gli occhi miet fu lume, e spegho. 
Noja m’ é'l viver st gravosa, e lunga, 
Cl’ ? chiamo il fine per lo gran desire 


Di riveder, cui non veder fu °l megho 


203 


SONNET LXI. 


Nor beamy stars that climb the blue serene ; 
Nor fresh-trimm’d vessel riding the smooth sca ; 
Nor knights stretch d o'er the plain in arm’d array ; 
Nor deer brisk-bounding forest glades between ; 

Nor early tidings of some good forescen ; 

Nor love’s exalted, and embellish’d lay ; 
Nor beauteous damsels warbling carols gay 
Near limpid fountain, or in meadow green ; 

Nor aught delightful shall this heart hold dear, 
Which deep entomb'd with iny lov’d Laura lies, 
Late the sole light, and mirror of these eyes ! 

So loath’d and tedious now doth life appear, 

I fain would yield it up; again to view =, 


Her, whom I much lament that e’er I knew. 


204 


SONETTO LAXII. 


274. 


Turra la mia jiorita, e verde etade 
Passava ; e’ntepidir sentia gia’ l foco, 
Cv arse °l mio cor’; ed era giunto al loco, 
Ove scende la vita, ch’ al fin cade: 

Gia incominciava a prender sicurtade 
La mia cara nemica a poco a poco 
De’ suoi sospetti ; e rvcolgeva in gioco 
Mie pene acerbe sua dclce onestade: 

Presso era ’l tempo, dow’ amor st scontra 
Con castitate ; ed a gli amanti é dato 
Sedersi insieme, e dir che lor’ incontra. 

Morte ebbe invidia al mio felice stato, 
Anzi alla speme; e féglisi all incontra 


A mesza vid, come nemico armate. 


205 


SONNET LNIL. 


My verdurous, and bloomy prime was past; 
More faintly glow'’d my bosom’s scorching flame ; 
Aud to that portion of my days I caine, 

When life declining to its end doth haste : 
My hostile fair suspicion had nigh ceas’d, 
Of insecurity did hittle dream ; 
Oftimes my tender sorrows were her theme, 
On which some courtcous merriment she cast: 

Now time at length that sober period brought, 
When chastity might fondness safely greet, 
And social lovers speak cach inmost thought : 

‘Then death, invidious of a joy so sucet 
F’en in expectance, cross’d me on my road, 


And, like an armed foe, despoil’ u.e of my good. 


206 


SONETTO LXTII. 
279. 


Seno U aura mia antica; e% dolci colli 
Veggio apparir, onde ’l bel lume nacque, 
Che tenne gl occhi miei, mentr’ al ciel piacque, 
Bramosi, e heti; or l tien tristi, e molli. 
O caduche speranze, o pensier folli ! 
Vedove l’ erbe, e torbide son U acque ; 
E voto, e freddo ’l nido, in ch’ ella giacque, 
Nel qual’ to vivo, e morto giacer vollt ; 
Sperando al fin dalle soavi piante, 
E da’ beglt occhi suot, che’! cor m’ hanw arso, 
Riposo alcun delle fatiche tante. 
Ho servito a signor crudele, e scarso: 
Ch avsi, quanto ’l mio foco ebbi davante ; 


Or vo piangendo tl suo cenere sparso. 


207 


SONNET LXIII. 


I res the well-known gale ; the hills I spy 
So pleasant, whence my fair her being drew, 
Which made these eyes, while heav’n was willing, show 
Wishful, and gay; now sad, and never dry. 
O feeble hopes! O thoughts of vanity ! 
Wither d the grass, the rills of turbid huc ; 
And void, and checrless is that dwelling too, 
Where I could both have wishd to live, to die; 
Hoping its mistress might at length afford 
Some respite to my woes by plaintive sighs, 
And sorrows pour'd from her once-burning eyes. 
I’ve serv'd a cruel, and ungrateful lord : 
While liv'd my beauteous flame, my heart he fird ; 


And o’er its ashes now I weep expird. 


208 


CANZONE X. 
43. 


Aor, quando fioria 
Mia spene, eV guidardon &@ ogni mia fede, 


Zolta m’ ¢ quella, ond’ attendea mercede. 


Ahi dispietata morte, ahi crudel vita: 
LD’ una m ha posto in dogha, 
E mie speranze acerbamente ha spente : 
L’ altra mi ten quaggiu contra mia vogha ; 
E lei, che sen’ é gita, 


Seguir non posso ; ch’ ella nol consente : 


209 


ODE X. 


Yes, Love, at that propitious time 
When hope was in its bloomy prime, 
And when I vainly fancied nigh 
The meed of all my constancy ; 

Then sudden she, of whom I sought 
Compassion, from my sight was caught. 
O ruthless death! O life severe ! 

The one has sunk me deep in care, 
And darken’d cruelly my day, 

That shone with hope’s enliv’ning ray: 
The ether, adverse to my will, 


Doth here on earth detain me still ; 


210 


Ma pur’ ognor presente 
Nel mezzo del mio cor madonna siede, 


E qual é la mia vita, ella sel vede. 


211 


And interdicts me to pursue 
Her, who from all its scenes withdrew : 
Yet in my heart resides the fair, 

For ever, ever present there ; 

Who well perceives the ills that wait 


Upon my wretched, mortal state. 


212 


SONETTO LXIV. 
287. 


Itz, rime dolenti, al duro sasso, 
Che ’l mio caro tesoro in terra asconde : 
Ivi chiamate, chi dal ciel risponde ; 
Benché’l mortal sia in loco oscuro, ¢ basso. 
Ditele ch’ w son gia di viver lasso, 
Del navigar per queste orribil’ onde: 
Ma, ricogliendo le sue sparte fronde, 
Dietro le vo pur cost passo passo. 
Sol di let ragionando viva, e morta, 
Anzi pur viva, ed or fatta immortale ; 
Accid che’l mondo la conosca, ed ame. 
Piacciale al mio passar’ esser accorta ; 
Ch’ 2 presso omai: siami all’ incontro ; ¢ quale 


Elia é nel cielo, a sé ms tirt, e chiame. 


213 


SONNET LXIV. 


Go, plaintive verse, to the dull marble go, 
Which hides in earth my treasure from these eyes ; 
There call on her who answers from yon skies, 
Although the mortal part dwells dark and low, 
Of life how I am wearied make her know, 
Of stemming these dread waves that round me rise : 
But, copying all her virtues I so prize, 
Her track I follow, yet my steps are slow. 
I sing of her, living, or dead, alone ; 
(Dead did I say? She is immortal made !) 
That by the world she should be lov’d, and known. 
O, in my passage hence may she be near, 
To greet my coming that’s not long delay’d ; . 
And may I hold in heav'n the rank herself hold there! 


214 


SONETTO LXV. 
294. 


Laseraro hai, Morte, senza sole tl mondo 
Oscuro, e freddo ; Amor cieco, ed inferme ; 
Leggiadria ignuda ; le bellezze inerme ; 
Me sconsolato, ed a me grave pondo ; 

Cortesia in bando ; ed onestate in fondo: 
Dogliom io sol, né sol’ ho da dolerme : 
Che svelt’ hai di virtute il chiaro germe, 
Spento il primo valor, qual fia il secondo ? 

Pianger U aer’, e la terra, e’l mar devrebbe 
DT? uman legnaggio ; che ee ella é quasi 
Senza fior prato, o senza gemma anello. 

Non la conobbe il mondo, mentre l’ ebbe: 
Conobbil io, ch’ a pianger qui ramasi ; 


E ’l ciel, che del mio pianto or si fa bello. 


215 


SONNET LXV. 


Tov, Death, hast left this world’s dark, cheerless way 
Without a sun: Love blind, and strip’d of arms ; 
Left mirth despoil’d; beauty bereav'd of charms ; 
And me self-wearied, to myself a prey ; 

Left vanish'd, sunk whate’er was courteous, gay : 

I only weep, yet all must feel alarms : 
If beauty’s bud the hand of rapine harms 
It dies, and not a second views the day! 

Let air, earth, ocean weep for human kind ; 
For human kind, depriv’d of Laura, seems 
A flow’rless mead, a ring whose gem is lost 

None knew her worth, while to this orb confin’d, 
Save me her bard, whose sorrow ceaseless streams, 


tS) 
And heav’n that's made more beauteous at my cost. 


216 


SONETTO LAXVI. 
302. 


Gir angeli cletti, eV anime beate 
Cittadine del cielo, tl primo giorno 
Che madonna pass0, le fur’ intorno 
Piene di maravigha, e dt pietate. 
* Che luce é€ questa, ¢ qual nova beltate ?” 
Dicean tra lor: “ Perch’ abito si adorno 
‘* Dal mondo errante a quest’ alto soggtorno 
“ Non salt mai wm tutta questa etate.” 
Ella, contenta ever cangiato albergo, 
Si paragena pwr coi pr perfetts ; 
E parte ad or’ ad or st volge a tergo, 
Mirando 8 + la segue; ¢ par ch aspetts: 
QOnd’ io woglie, e pensier tutte al ciel’ ergo, 
Perel’ so odo progar pur, ch’ i’ m’ affretti. 


217 


SONNET LXVI. 


Tue chosen angels, and the spirits blest, 
Celestial tenants, on that glorious day 
My mistress pass’d them, throng’d in bright array 
Around her, with amaze and awe imprest. 
“ What splendour, what new beauty stands confest 
“ Unto our sight:” among themselves they say : 
“ No soul, in this vile age, from sinful clay 
“To our high realms has risen so fair a guest.” 
Delighted to have chang’d her mortal state, 
She ranks amid the purest of her kind ; 
And ever and anon she looks behind, 
To mark my progress, and my coming wait ; 
Now my whole thought, my wish to heav'n I cast ; 


Tis Laura’s voile I hear, and hence she bids me haste, 


218 


SONETTO LXVITI. 
304. 


Dt pit begli occhi, e dal pi chiaro V1SO, 
Che mai splendesse ; e da’ piu bei capelli, 
Che facean I’ oro, e ‘i sol parer men belli ; 
Dal piu dolce parlar’, e dolce riso ; 

Dalle man, dalle braccia ; che conquiso 
Senza moversi avrian quai piu rebelli 
Fur d’ amor mai; da piu bei piedi snelli ; 

Dalla persona fatta in paradiso 

Prendean vita it miei spirti: orn’ ha diletto 
Il re celeste, e 2 suoi alati corrieri ; 

Ed io son qui rimaso ignudo, e€ cieco. 

Sol’ un conforto alle mie pene aspetto ; 
Ch’ ella, che vede tutti i miei pensieri, 


MM impetre grazia, ch i’ possa esser seco. 


219 


SONNET LXVII. 


The brightest eyes, the most resplendent face 
That ever shone; and the most radiant hair, 

With which nor gold, nor sunbeam could compare ; 
The sweetest accent, and a smile all grace ; 

Hands, arms, that would e’en motionless abase 
Those who to love the most rebellious were ; 

Fine, nimble feet; a form that would appear 
Like that of her, who first did Eden trace : 

These fann’d life’s spark—Now heav’n, and all its choir 
Of angel hosts those kindred charms admire ; 
While lone, and darkling I on earth remain: 

Yet is not comfort fled ; she, who can read 
Each secret of my soul, shall intercede ; 


Aud I her sainted form behold again. 


220 


SONETTO LCXAVITTL. 


310. 


Voxo con I’ ali de’ pensieri al cielo 
S2 spesse volte, che quasi un di loro 
Esser m par, c’ hann vi il suo tesoro, 
Lasciando in terra lo squarciato velo. 
Talor mi trema’l cor ad’ un dolce gelo 
Udendo lei, per cl’ 10 mu: discoloro, 
Dirmi: “Amico, or t am io, ed or t’ onoro, 
“© Perc’ hai costumi variatt, e 'l pelo.” 
Menami al suo Signor’: allor m’ inchino 
Pregando umilemente, che consenta 
Ch’ i’ sti’ a veder el’ uno, el’ altro volto. 
Risponde: “ Egh é ben fermo u tuo destino ; 
“< E per tardar ancor vent’ anni, o trenta, 


‘“‘ Parra a te troppo, e non fia perd molto.” 


22) 


SONNET LXVIII. 


So often on the wings of thought I fly 
Up to heav’n’s blissful seats, that I appear 
As one of those whose treasure is lodg’d there, 
The rent veil of mortality thrown by. 
A pleasing chilness thrills my heart, while I 
Listen her voice, who bids me paleness wear— 
“ Ah now, my friend, | love thee, now revere, 
“ For chang’d thy face, thy manners!” doth she cry. 
She leads me to her Lord: and then I bow, 
Preferring humble pray’, he would allow 
That I his glorious face, and hers might see. 
Thus he replies : ‘‘ Thy destiny’s secure ; 
“To stay some twenty, or some ten years more, 


“Ts but a little space, though long it seems to thee.” 


222 


SONETTO LXIX. 
313. 


L vo prangendo 1 miei passati tempi, 

I quai post in amar cosa mortale 
Senza levarmi a volo, avend’ io l’ ale, 
Per dar forse di me non bassi esempt. 

Tu, che vedi i miet mali indegni, ed empi, 
Re del cielo invisibile, immortale ; 
Soccorri all’ alma disviata, e frale, 

E ’l suo difetto di tua grazia adempi. 

Sicche, s’ io vissi in guerra, ed in tempesta ; 
Mora in pace, ed in porto: e se la stanza 
Fu vana, almen sia la partia onesta. 

A quel poco di viver, che m’ avanza ; 

Ed al morir, degni esser tua man presta: 
; 


Tu sai ben, che’n altrus non ho speranza. 


223 


SONNET LXIX. 


Sixx do I weep the days that are gone by, 
When sublunary things my fondness sway d, 
And no bold flight, though having wings, I made, 
Haply to give of me examples high. 

Thou, who my impious, foul misdeeds dost spy, 
Dread Lord of heaven immortal, viewless! aid 
The soul that's frail, that has from duty stray’d ; 
And its defect O let thy grace supply ! 

Thus if life’s warfare, and its storm I prov’d, 
Peace, and a harbour may in death be mine : 
Though vain my stay, I’ll worthily depart. 

For that short period ere I’m hence remov’d, 

And at the last, extend thy hand divine : 


Thou knowst, that thou alone giv’st hope unto my heart. 


224, 


SONETTO LXX. 
$17. 


V 160 augelletto, che cantando vai, 

Ovver piangendo il tuo tempo passato 
Vedendoti la notte, el verno a lato, 
E’l di dopo le spalle, et mesi gat ; 

Se come i tuot gravost affanni sai, 
Cosi sapesst il mio simile stato ; 
Verresti in grembo a questo sconsolato 
A partir seco t dolorost guai. 

LI non sé se le parti sarian pat ; 
Che quelia, cui tu piangi, é forse in vita ; 
Di ch’ a me morte, e’l ciel son tanto avari: 

Ma la stagione, e l’ ora men gradtta, 
Col membrar de’ dolct anni, e degh amari, 


A parlar teco con pieta m’ invita. 


%> 
Fe) 
Or 


SONNET LXX. 


Sweer bird, that singest on thy airy way, 
Or else bewailest pleasures that arc past ; 
What time the night draws nigh, and wintry blast ; 
Leaving behind each merry month, and day ; 
O, couldst thou, as thine own, my state survey, 
With the same gloom of miscry o’ercast ; 
Unto my bosom thou mightst surely haste, 
And, by partaking, all my griefs allay. 
Yet would thy share of woe not equal minc, 
Since the lov’d mate thou weep’st may haply live ; 
While death, and heav’n, me of my fair deprive : 
But hours less gay, the season’s drear decline ; 
With thoughts on many a sad, and pleasant year, 


Tempt me to ask thy piteous presence here. 


Q 


N O'T ES. 


NOTES 


TO THE 


SONNETS, AND ODES. 


SONNET LI. 


IN this first Sonnet, which serves as a proem to the Sonnets 
in general, the classic reader will perceive how closely Ilorace 
is copied in the fourth, ninth, and tenth lines of the Italian. 
See his Od. 1. Lib. 4. and Epod. 11. The Abhé de Sade, 
author of Memoircs pour la Vie de Petrarque, remarks, how- 
ever, that Sonnet VI. Vergognando talor, &c. ought perhaps to 
stand as the first in the collection: for he therein accuses 
luimself of not having yet sung the beauty of his mistress, it 
may therefore justly be supposed the first Sonnet he wrote 
upon her. 

A translation in old English of the present poem may be 
found in the same collectiun of Songes and Sonnettes as @ontain 
the preceding prefatory Sonnet in black letter; it is entitled: 
Lhe lover asketh pardon of his passed folly in love. 


SONNET II. 


This stands as the first of the many Sonnets Petrarch com- 
posed, to celebrate that memorable day, which gave such co- 
lour to his life, when he first saw Laura at the church of St. 
Claire, inAvignon; it was on a Monday, April 6,1327. “ Till 
“ then,” says he, “ I had been guilty of much offence towards 
“« Love, by not sooner submitting to his power; but he has at 
“ length avenged himself.” And to express this, our poet as- 
sumes a military metaphor. 


SONNET III. 


A well-educated lady, named Giustina Levi Perotti of Sasso- 
ferrato, daughter of Andrea Perotti of the ancient, and illus- 
trious house of Levi, was enthusiastically fond of poetry; and 
this turn having drawn upon her the raillery of some of her 
friends, she consulted Petrarch in a Sonnet whether he would 
advise her to indulge it. Le answered her by the present 
Sonnet, which is composed of the same rhymes with that the 
lady sent. Jn the twelfth line of the orginal some few edi- 
tions have falta via. 


SONNET IV. 

Petrarch, it would appear, sometimes amused himself with 
the sports of the field. Having one day caught a brace of 
birdss which some contend were woodpigeons, others par- 
tridges, in the country near Laura’s birth-place, he sent them 
to a friend, probably James ‘Colonna, the bishop, with the 


231 


present Sonnet, which the birds themselves are supposed to 
speak, although in no living state, as 1s evident from the 
eleventh line. This composition is by the Abbé de Sade re- 
ferred to the year 1331. ‘Tassoni, who is often humorous, as 
well as severe, in his criticisms on Petrarch, observes with 
respect to the first eight lines, that, /’ ordine é pid sconvolto, ¢ 
riturto, che non é la coda del gran diavolo. 


ODE I. 


“ In early beauty,” says Petrarch, “ ere you were aware of 
“ my passion, and when you endeavoured to render yourself 
generally pleasing, you then displayed to me all your charms; 
but now that you know my attachment, you hide with 
your veil those particular beauties to which I am so partial, 
your fine hair, and lovely eyes, What else can account for 
your so constantly wearing that veil; whether the sun re- 
quires it, or no; whether it be warm, or cold?” Such is 
the interpretation of Daniello, Vellutello, and others. He 
again expresses his hostility towards this veil, inSonnet XXXII. 
Tacitus attributes a similar artifice of the veil to Poppea: 
Vilata parte ori, ne satiarct aspectum, vel quia sic decebat. 

In what high estimation Petrarch was held by the writers, 
particulaily the amatory poets, in the beginning of the 16th 
century, 1s evident from their frequent translations, and imi- 
tations of his verse. Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, and Sir 
Thomas Wyat the elder, two of the most polite scholars, and 
gentlemen of Henry the eighth’s court, are striking instances 
of this: they copy him continually; and have been justly 
termed the reformers of our English metre, and styler Asa 
specimen of Lord Surrey’s manner, I will give his translation 
entire of this. first Canzone of Petrarch, which he entitles: 


&6 


73 


C¢ 


‘TS 


cs 


rc 


292 


Complaint that hys Ladie after she knew of hys love, kept her 
face alwayes hydden from hym. 


I never sawe my ladie laye apart 
Her cornet blacke, in colde nor yet in heate, 
Sith fyrst she knew my griefe was growen so greate, 
Whyche other funsies dryveth from my harte, 
That to myselfe I do the thought reserve, 
The whyche unwares dyd wound my woful brest, 
But on her face mine ¢ies mought never rest: 
Yet synce I knew I dyd her love and serve, 
Her golden tresses cladde allway with blacke ; 
Her smyleying lookes that had thus evermore, 
And that restraynes which ] desire so sore: 
So doth this cornet governe mee, alacke! 
In somer sunne, in winter’s breathe, a frost 


Wherebye the lyghte of her fayre lookes I lost. 


SONNET V. 


Petrarch is supposed to have written this Sonnet during the 
year 1331. In the seventh line he takes oecasicn to mention, 
as he does in other parts of his poems, the very garment, and 
its colour, which Laura had on the first day he saw her. 
Tassoni calls those sighs of Laura in her old-age, mentioned in 
the last line; ZZ sorcorso di Pisa, che arrivd quarunta giorne 


dopo ch’ ella fu presa. 


SONNET VI. 


See the note to Sonnet]. The metaphor taken up in the 
fifth line is evidently in imitation of Houace. 


233 


Sunate materiam vestris, qui scribitis, aquam 
Viribus: et versate diu, qui ferre recuscnt 
Quid valcant humeri. 
Horat. De Arte poetica. 


SONNET VIL. 


This Sonnet, Castelvetro observes, 1s grounded upon the 
Platonic philosophy. ‘The soul of the lover is said to reside 
in the beloved object, nov in the lover’s self: if then the be- 
loved object despises that soul, and drives it away; as it cannot 
exist out of the human frame, and will not reside with any 
other than the beloved ubject, it must of necessity dic. “ What 
“ rhetorick belongs to enamoured poets of high genius!” 
exclaims La Ceva: “ Few like Petrarch could express with 
“ perspicuity, and poetic dignity, the many subtile ideas which 
“ these lines contain.” And to transfuse them into another 
language is scarcely practicable. 


ODE IL. 


The second line of this Can-one I have not translated; the 
exception it uffects secs little pertinent, and meant only to in- 
troduce scriptural quotation, which we shall find our bard fre- 
quently aimed at. See the royal Psalter, Psalm 104. ver. 20— 
23. By the amorosa selva, in the fifth stanza, Petrarch has in 
view the nemus wnbrofcrum of Virgil, where Dido again met 
her husband Sichaus. See ned. 6. ver. 472. The sixth 
stanza, wherein the story of Phabus and Daphne is evidently 
alluded to, has been adduced by the Abbé de Sade, in his 
Memuoires, as a proof, among many others, that eur poet’s pas- 


234 


sion for Laura was of a more sensual nature than has gene- 
rally been supposed. 


SONNET VIII. 


This Sonnet is supposed to have been written during a dan- 
gerous illness that befel Laura, from a disorder then prevalent 
at Avignon, occasioned by the extreme drought of the season; 
at which time she appeared to Petrarch as a vision in his 
sleep. Lucifer, or the morning star, and Callisto, or the 
greater bear, are the only stars that are brightened by the 
rising sun; all the other stars grow dim, and disppear. See 
the metamorphosis of Callisto in ilyginus, Jab. 184. 


SONNET IX. 


Petrarch had planted a laurel by the side of a stream, to 
which Laura in her walks frequently resorted; and he it- 
plores Apollo to protect it. Our Poet affected a partiality for 
the laurel, by reason of 1ts coincidence with the name of his 
mistress Laura; and he presumes that Apollo entertained the 
same partiality, by reason of his beloved Daphne being trans- 
formed into that tree, on the banks of the river Peneus. This 
will sufficiently explain the Sonnet, and its concett: which are 


almost untranslatable. 


SONNET X. 


It is uncertain at what period, or upon what occasion, Pe- 
trarch composed this Sonnet; it may perhaps be referred to 


235 


the year 1334, as it seems to be written in the same frame of 
mind with other poems he composed in that year. 


SONNET XI. 


This is one of the most sportive of Petrarch’s Sonnets. 
He complains that Laura by frequent contemplation of her 
beauty in the looking-glass, which he calls his rival, grows 
too fond of herself, and neglects him. “ U,” says he to her,” 
“T could but fix my image in that glass, you would not re- 
“ gard yourself alone ; you would of necessity regard me also, 
“ Remember the lot of Narcissus, who for self-admiration 
“was transformed into a flower; yet, were you ,so trans- 


“formed, in what soil sufficiently worthy could you grow?” 


SONNET XIL. 


This Sonnet is supposed to have been written 1336, about 
the same time with Canzone TV. Petrarch here accuses his 
tongue, his tears, and his sighs of not doing him the same 
justice, in the declaration of his passion, as his countenance 
does him. Sir Thomas Wyat the elder has translated this 
Sonnet, entitling it: Agamst his tong that failed to utter his 
suites. 


ODE ITI. 


Petrarch here complains of the wretchedness of bis con- 
dition, by comparing it with that of a pilgrim (an aged, and 
female one too, whose wanderings must be most painful), a 
labouring peasant, a shepherd, and a sailor; they have all 


236 


their repose, but his passion allows him none. The perpetual 
allusions to Virgil, Horace, and Ovid, in his choice of 
imagery, it is needless to point out to the classic reader. The 
fourth Italian stanza would perhaps inform us, that this Ode 
was composed about the year 1337, nearly ten years (ben 
presso al decim’ anno) after he first saw Laura. The end of 
the fifth stanza alludes to the different opinions maintained 
by the Peripateticks, and Platonists, respecting the soul when 
freed from our mortal body ; the former supposed, that it was 
then no longer influenced by the passions ; the latter believed 
the contrary, hence Virgil, Zneid. 6. ver. 444. Cure non ipsa 
in morte relinguunt. And, from the conclusion, Castelvetro, 
with Daniello would infer, that it was written in the space 
of a day; which, observes Tassoni, is probable enough: the 
poet therefore recommends to his Ode, that, for want of due 
polish, it should not obtrude itself on the public, but be con- 
tent like himself with seclusion. 


ODE IY. 


Propertius expresses a like sentiment to that contained in 


the conclusion of this Canzone. 


Laus in amore mort. 


Prorert. Eleg. 1. Lib. 2. 


ODE V. 


This is the first of three successive Canzoni, the most cele- 
brated of all Petrarch’s poetical compositions, written at Vau- 
cluse, about the year 1339. They are addressed to the eyes 
of his mistress ; and have acquired the appellations of “ the 


937 


three Sisters,” “ the three Graces,” “ the three Divinities.” 
All Italy entertains for them, even at this day, the most en- 
thusiastie admiration. The Abbé Salvini calls them “ perfect 
“ Venuses, which the most fastidious critic cannot find the 
“ smallest fault with.” Sebastian Erizzo, who has explained 
them, says, that they abound with sublime thoughts, and are 
decorated with every poetical ornament. liven the severe 
Tassom denominates them “ the Queens of song,” affirming, 
that they might alone entitle their author tu the laurel crown. 
And Muratori insists, that every reader of taste must allow, 
that Italian poetry can boast of nothing more exquisite. The 
Abbé de Sade, however, does not find them wholly void of 
defects. 


SONNET XIII. 


This Sonnet, though it may not perhaps rank among the 
highest of poetic excellence, is yet valuable, as it informs 
us, that our poet had employed Simon Memmi of Siena, a 
celebrated artist of that day, to paint Laura's picture : and it 
is preceded by another to the same purpose. Vasari remarks 
upon these two Sonnets, that Simon would be more obliged 
to them for future fame than to all the pictures he ever 
painted ; the former might be transmitted to latest posterity, 
time must inevitably destroy the latter. 


SONNET XIV. 


Petrarch evidently wrote these lines when Laura was no 
longer in her bloom, and, as is supposed, about the year 1342. 
His description of her charms is perhaps imitated from Vir- 
gil, Zneid. 1. ver. 400. Some pretend, that a noble friend of 


238 


our poet’s, desirous of seeing such a miracle of beauty, ex- 
‘pressed, on being introduced to her, much disappointment ; 
on which occasion Petrarch presented him this Sonnet. In 
the concluding line we trace the old Latin proverb : 


Gladius retusus non sanat culnus. 


SONNET XV. 


Cino of Pistoia was an eminent civilian, who read lectures 
at Bologna, where Petrarch, when young, studied under him ; 
he was also an elegant poet, which endeared him to his pupil, 
who thus laments his loss. The citizens of Pistoia are 
called perverse, for some neglect towards so celebrated a cha- 
racter. 

The turn of this Sonnet is not unlike that of the third 
Carmen of Catullus : 


Lugete, 0 Venercs, Cupidinesque. 


SONNET XVI. 


Tassoni accuses Petrarch of having stolen this Sonnet from 
Antonio di Beccari, a poet of Ferrara; and he quotes Bec- 
cari’s Sonnet, which certainly has a strong resemblance. The 
Abbé de Sade supposes, that our bard had in the present cor- 
rected the Sonnet of his friend Beccari. It was perhaps writ- 
ten in the year 1344. As Cesar disguised his joy by tears, 
so Hannibal concealed his grief by laughter. Petrarch alludes 
to these two circumstances, as related the one by Lucan, and 
the other by Livy. See Lucan, Lz. 9. ver. 1035, where 
he describes Cesar’s behaviour, on receiving Pompey’s head 
from Ptolemy Dionysius, Egypt's traitor. See also Livy, Lid. 


239 


10. decad. 3. where the vanquished Hannibal affected langh- 
ter, amidst his weeping Carthaginians, when they reluctantly 
paid the heavy fine imposed upon them, as the purchase of 
peace. A translation of this Sonnet in old English is found 
in Harrington’s Nuga Antique, Vol. 1. by Sir ‘Thomas Wyat 
the elder, who entitles it, in his works: Of others’ fained sor- 


row, and the lover's fained marth. 


SONNET XVII. 


This is one of the Sonnets, in which our poet inveighs 
againol the profigacy of the court of Avignon, designating 
it by the appellation of Babylon; it is not however one of 
those condemned by Papal power, and suppressed in some edi- 
tions of his works. We may perhaps date it about the year 
1343. The last ¢crzeffo has a reference to his mistress Laura; 
and his friend Stephen Colonna, who was driven from Rome 
by the Orsim faction, and consequently insecure in his sta- 
tion. Some pretend that a fit of the gout, which the Cardi- 
nal laboured under, is here alluded to. 


SONNET XVIII. 


Petrarch taking leave of Laura, previous to his departure 
from Avignon, in 1345, she became sensibly affected, and 
turned pale. The subject of the present is best explained by the 
rote to Sonnet XAVII. Po, ben puo’ tu, &c. 


ODE VI. 


This much admired Canzone is always accompanied with 
another, which succeeds it: Chiare, fresche, e dolci acque, &c. 


240 


and of which a most elegant free translation, in the same 
measure with the present, is found among the Poems of the 
late Sir William Jones. Gravina calls these Canzont ‘The 
two pretty Sisters.” They both turn upon the same subject, 
the rural scenery that witnessed the tender intercourse of Pe- 
trarch and Laura. They were both written probably in the 
year 1544. Commentators have been unnecessarily divided 
respecting the locality of the country alluded to. Supposing, 
as the Italians generally do, that Laura lived at Cabritres, and 
that Petrarch fixed his residence at Vaucluse, for the sake of 
being near, and gaining opportunities of seeing her, the scene 
must then of course he between these two places, on the bunks 
of the Sorga: Voltaire indeed, who translated the second of 
these pieces, makes it addressed to the Fountain of Vaucluse ; 
whereas Vellutellv, Tassomi, and others assert, perhaps er- 
roneously, that the present Canzone was composed on the 
banks of the Conlon, a muddy stream about a mile distant 
from Cabritres, where the country is not very inviting ; and 
the second only on the banks of the Sorga. 


SONNET XIX. 


Petrarch affects a scriptural quotation, so frequent with 
him, in the beginning of this Sonnet. ‘“ He hath bent his 
bow, and set me as a mark for the arrow.” Prophet Jere- 
miah, Lament. Ch. 3. ver. 12. And he then relates his wretch- 
edness under four different similitudes. In the last line, the 
play upon his mistress’s name, as 1’ aura (the gale) cannot 
escape the Italian reader. 


241 


SONNET XX. 


it was probably written in the year 1346, when Petrarch’s 
mind was more particularly distracted with the hopes and 
fears of his passion. The chain of antithesis it contains 
would remind us of the 8th Bastum of Bonefonius: Salve 
melque meum ; atgue amaritudo, &c. We may be also led to 
fancy, that we can trace in it the following stanza, which be- 
gins a little poem composed by our royal Flizabeth, “ upon 
"Mount Zeurs departure.” (Ashmol. Mus. MSS. 6969—781— 
p. 142.) 


I greeve yet dure not shewe ny discontent, 

I love and yet am forst to seeme to hate, 
I doe yet dare not say I ever meant, 

I seeme starke mute but inwardly doe prate, 
[ am and not, I freeze and yet am burn’d, 
Since from myself my other selfe I turn’d. 


That the higher ranks of Queen Elizabeth’s day wefe com 
versant with Petrarch is evident from this very Sonnet, with 
others of his, being found faithfully translated into old English 
in Harrington’s Nuge Antique, Vol. 1. among which is the 
present by Sir Thomas Wyat the elder, in whose collection of 


poems it is entitled: Description of the contrarious passions of a 
lover. 


SONNET XXI, 


This Sonnet, a trauslation of which is found in Hirring- 
ton’s Nuga Antique, Vol. 1. was written on the game grounds 
as Sonnet XVII. It stands the first of those three condemned 
by the court of Rome, and suppressed in all the then prin 
editions of Petrarch’s poetry; they have consequently found 

R 


24.2 


but few translators, or commentators. “A dieu ne plaise 
que j’ entreprenne de les traduire!” squeamishly exclaims 
the Abbé de Sade. Some ridiculously enough pretend, that 
this poetical invective was meant against a noble lady of 
the house of Medici, for whom our bard had reason to enter- 
tain an aversion: others affirm, it was against the wife of 
Marco Bruseo a Provencal poet, who was herself @ poetess, it 
it said, and the rival of Petrarch. In the seventh line of the 
present we may trace the first of Sonnet II]. Among the poems 
of Sir Thomas Wyat the elder we find a translation of the 
present piece. 


ODE VII. 


The Abbé de Sade would refer this Canzone to the year 
1346, when Petrarch vainly fancied that Laura gave some 
encouragement to his passion. But Vellutello would refer it 
to the year 1344, when he was graciously received by her, 
on his return from Italy, making the visit he promises himself 
in Sonnet XXIX. I cannot forbear giving the Italian reader a 
specimen of Tassoni’s mirthful criticism, in his remark on the 
first two lines of this poem: Quel farst men duro i riso, é qua- 
lita pid convenevole al riso, che st cuoce per minestra, che non é 
quello, che si fa colla bocca. The measure, and arrangement 
of the rhymes, in this translation, are exactly conformable to 
those of the original. 


SONNET XXII. 


From the present Sonnet we may conjecture, that Laura 
was a dark-eyed beauty. The conceit of Cupid making her 
eyes his armoury, there finishing his golden arrows, is elegant; 


243 


and his picture of the little deity truly classical. To the bard, 
who could so paint him, may be applied those lines of Pro- 
pertius, Eleg. 4. Lib. 2. 
Quicunque ille fuit puerum qui pinxit Amorem, 
Nonne putas miras hunc habuisse manus ? 


The three last lines rather betray a vain glory. 


SONNET XXIII. 


Commentators tell us, that Petrarch composed this Sonnet 
in 1346, on seeing Laura lament the loss of either one of 
her parents, or of some friend: Ermessenda her mother, and 
Paul de Sade her father-in-law, 1 believe, both died that year. 
The ingenious Dr. Burney, in his History of Musick, Vol. 2. 
page 334, adduces this, with other passages from Petrarch’s 
poems, to prove that Laura was conversant with musick : her 
bard, we know, cultivated that science ; for he bequeaths his 
** good lute to Master Thomas Bombasio of Ferrara, that he 
“ might sound it, not for the vanity of a fleeting age, but to 
“ the praise and glory of the eternal God.” 


SONNET XXIV. 


The Platonists, and some other philosophers, pretended 
that in heaven were kept the ideas, or models of every ani- 
mal, and of all created beings; to which opinion the begin- 
ning of our Sonnet alludes. By the chiefest of I eae 
tues is meant chastity, which precluded all pretensifM to the 
indulgence of passion. And in the conclusion of the Sonnet 
we evidently trace Horace, Ode 22. Book 1. 






Dulce ridentem Lalagen amabo, 
Dulce loquentem. 
R 2 


24.4. 


SONNET XXV. 


This Sonnet points out the custom, which the ladies of 
Avignon still observe, of bathing in the Rhone during the 
warm summer months: it was perhaps written in those months 
of the year 1348, and proves that Laura then dwelt at Avig- 
non. Some commentators pretend that the Sorga, others that 
the Lumergue, or the Coulon, both running near Cabri¢res, is 
the puro fume alluded to; but the two last are certainly only 
poor muddy streams. 


SONNET XXVI, 


The Power of Love is intended in the eighth line; and 
similar to the last line is the idea of our amorous English poet, 
Sedley: 


Cupid that lover weakly strikes, 
Who can express what ’tis he likes. 


With the same thought too Samuel Daniel concludes his first 
Sonnet : 


Who can shew all his love, doth love but lightly. 


' SONNET XXVIII. 


Petrarch wrote the present Sonnet in the spring of 1345, 
after takgpe that tender farewell of Laura to which he alludes 
in that tiful one, Quel vago wmpallidir, &c. when he quitted 
Avignon, intending to pass the remainder of his days in Italy. 
We are told he embarked on the Po at Parma, to go to Ve- 
rona; in which case, corno, in the 12th line, is a most happy 
expression ; it being a horned, or bent branch of that river 
which joins those towns. The Po running from west to east, 


245 


it of course quits the westward situation of Avignon, the resi- 
dence of the bright Laura, to meet the rising sun. 


SONNET XXVIII, 


Tassoni highly extole this Sonnet, as a masterly composi- 
tion; and the Abbe de Sade adduces it, as authentically desig- 
nating one of the gay suits of Laura’s apparel, which, from 
the sixth line, it would seem she then chose to have put on for 
the first time. 


SONNET XXIX. 


Petrarch is supposed to have written it in the year 1344, 
approaching Avignon, on his return from Italy. In this jour- 
ney he had a fall from his horse, which greatly endangered 
him. In the fourth line a conceit 1s intended: Laura (L’aurdy 
the pale) occasioned Petrarch both grief, and renown; by his 
unfortunate passion, and by his celebrated verse. 


SONNET XXX. 


Petrarch, herein, alludes to that period of time when he 
first knew Laura, and that she was yet a young married woman, 
having scarce left off her girlish attire, but still wearing her 
hair in a negligent unornamented style : whereas now, says he, 
she wears it less exposed, covered, and adorned with eb head- 
dresses, as is usual in womanhood. Altri, in the fifth line, 
implies her husband. 


246 


SONNET XXXI. 


The-lovely Laura combing and adjusting her beautiful tresses, 
is designated by the gale sporting with them ; and, as it were, 
performing the office of her fingers. By twofold, in the tenth 
line, our pvet alludes to the brightness both of the eyes, and 
hair of his mistress. 


. SONNET XXXII. 


Petrarch in the present Sonnet lays aside his usual queru- 
lous tone, and assumes that of sportive gallantry. Laura, be- 
ing at a public assembly, dropt her glove, which Petrarch, 
ever attentive to her, picked up, and would fain have detained; 
she however with some vivacity took it from him, though he 
reluctantly resigned it: and upon this subject he composed 
three successive Sonnets, of which this is the first. Our poet 
fm the second obscure line, which I have rendered verbatim, 
perhaps only meant to give the literal of a familiar figurative 
expression: ‘my life is in your hands, you are the, mistress 
“and arbiter of my fate.” By the cinque perle, in the fifth 
line, some imagine that the nails of his mistress’s -beautiful 
fingers are intended; but this is construing too refinedly, in my 
Opinion. A reference to the first Canzone will perhaps best 
explain the twelfth line. 


SONNET XXXII. 


It was written 1346, when Laura, on some occasion, 
doubted her Poet’s passion. The two last lines have been 
usually quoted, with what propriety I cannot see, in the 
notes to Gray’s Elegy, as giving the hint of the following stanza 
in it: 


@47 


On some fond breast the parting soul relies, 
Some pious drops the closing eye requires ; 

E’en from the tomb the voice of nature cries, 
F’en in our ashes live their wonted fires. 


Our poet, I believe, meant to say, that the warmth, and 
genius of his verse, when he and his mistress were no more, 
would inspire many a future lover. 


SONNET XXXIV. 


Our poet in the eight line evidently had his eye upon Ovid: 
Elige cui dicas, tu mihi sola places. 
Ovip. De Arte Amaadi. Jad. 1. 


SONNET XXXV. 


This Sonnet was written in the year 1345, between Lyons 
and Avignon, riding by the side of the Rhone; and he erro- 
neously makes this river derive its name from the Latin, or 
Italian, rodere ; though Pliny, and some others derive it from 
Rhoda, a city of Spain, whose inhabitants once peopled its 
banks; but itis perhaps more properly derived from the Celtic 
rhedeg, to flow rapidly, according to I'ather Pezron. In like 
manner Horace speaks of the Liris eating its way : 


Non rura, que Laris quiet 4 
Mordet aqué taciturnus amnis. 
Hor. Od. 31. Lib. 1. 


By the plain, in the seventh line, is intended the country 
about Avignon, where Laura then dwelt. And in the last 


line the original is literally scriptural. See St. Man&. Chap. 14° 
ver, 38, 


248 


SONNET XXXVI. 


It appears from one of his Epistles, written 1342, that 
Petrarch lost the freshness of youth at an early period of 
life; owing, as- he says, to the perpetual discord between 
his soul and his body. One of his friends remarking, that such 
a change could be no other than the effect of sorcery, the poet 
replied to him in the present Sonnet. 


SONNET XXXVII. 


In Petrarch’s day, the fine ladies literally rose with the sun; 
and it would appear from this, as well as from a variety of 
other Sonnets, that our bard was accustoined to take his early 
morning-walk near Laura’s habitation, to gain a sight of her 
at her window. Aurora is alluded to in the fifth line, who 
was wedded to Tithonus, a beautiful youth, for whom she 
obtained immortality, but whom she could not exempt from 
old-age ; the gods therefore in compassion transfurmed hiny to 
a grashopper. 


SONNET XXXVIII. 


It would seem probable, that Laura wore her hair, as might 
he the custom of those days, flowing over either shoulder. 
Lips, and teeth are here poctically denominated roses, and 
pearls. In the ninth line, allusion is made to the Pythagorean 
doctrine of the musick of the spheres, 


249 
SONNET XXXIX. 


in the beginning of this Sonnet the poet evidently had his 
eye upon Virgil. 
Tum sol pallentes haud unquam discutit umbras ; 
Nec cum mvectus equis altum petit athera ; nec cum 
Priecipitem oceant rubro lavit equore currum. 
Vine. Georg. 3. 


e 


SONNET XL. 


It is pretty closely translated by Sir Thomas Wyat the elder, 
he names it: Charging of his love as unpitcous, and loving other. 
Samuel Daniel too had un eye to it in his fifteenth Sonnet to 
Delia. In the eighth line we readily trace Horace : 


Nec tinctus viold pallor amantium. 
Jor. Od. 10, Lab. 3. 


SONNET XLI. 


Sir Wilham Jones, in the preface to his poetical Trans- 
latrons from the Asiatic languages, observes thus: ‘ Some 
‘* of the Persian songs have a striking resemblance to the 
“‘ Sonnets of Petrarch; and even the form of those little 


‘‘ amatory poems was, I believe, brought into Europe by the 


n~ 


~~ 


Arabians ; one would almost imagine the following lines 
to be translated from the Persian, 


~ 


“ Aura, che quelle chiome bionde, e crespe, &c.” 


ODE VIII. 


Some pretend, that Petrarch wrote this Canzone as he was 
passing the river Durance, which he designates, in the last 


250 


stanza, by the expression dure onde, and that he meant to 
send it to Laura, on the next day, at Avignon. The fourth 
line of the first stanza, and the same of the fifth stanza, are 
almost literally Virgil's : 


Quam multa in sylvis aorum se millia condunt. 


GEORG. 4. ver. 473. 


m— tacite per amica silentia lune. 


/ENEID. 2. ver. 255. 


On the sixth stanza the Abbé de Sade has bestowed a simi- 
Jar comment to that on the same stanza of Ode II. to which. 
the reader may refer. 


SONNET XLII. 


This Sonnet was written on the same occasion as the 
eighteenth. Herein Petrarch describes the agitation of his 
mind after parting from Laura, possessed with the idea that 
some misfortune would happen to her. 


SONNET XLII. 


By fango, in the eleventh line, 1s meant the licentious 
city of Avignon, where his valued Laura dwelt. As the 
three last lines in the original are so very obscure, and 
have been so variously interpreted, I only give the general 
idea, that fortune, in some one particular instance, was less 
unkind to our bard. Many pretend that he alludes to a re- 
concikation with his mistress, when she cordially took him by 
the hand; others, that she favourably received from him some 


251 


poetry he had written her. But, as the Abbé de Sade observes, 
the reader must furm his own conjecture. 


SONNET XLIV. 


This is the first of the Sonnets of Petrarch’s second Book ; 
and the succeeding Sonnets, and Odes are from the same. 
All the poems of that book were written after Laura’s death, 
and most of them may be considered as so many elegies on 
the subject. 


ODE IX. 


A manuscript copy of this Canzone is said to have been 
found in Petrarch’s own hand writing, wherein he begins it 
thus : 

Amor in pianto ogni mio riso é volto, 
Ogn’ allegrezza in dogha, 
Ed é oscurato w sole a gl occht met ; 
Ogm dolce pensicr del cor m’ é tolto, 
E sol 1 una dogha 
Rimasa m é di finir gli anni rez, 
E dt seguir colet, 
La qual di qua vedere omai non spero. 

He had written in the margin at top: “ Non sat triste prin- 
cium :” and below: “ Ne quid ultra.” After which, it is pre- 
sumed, he altered the first stanza as it now stands. Our 
poet's allusions to the doctrines of Platonism cannot escape 
the intelligent reader, particularly in the fourth stanza, where- 
in he speaks of the soul as J’ invistbil forma. His address in the 
last line: Vedova sconsolata, &c. is quite appropriate, the 
word Canzone being feminine. Upon the whole, the present 


2352 


poem would remind us of that reasoning on suicide, which our 
Shakspeare holds in the celebrated soliloquy of his Hamlet: 
** To be, or not to be, &c.” This one almost verbal version, 
in blank verse, may serve to give the English reader a more 
immediate idea of the diction, and phrase of the Tuscan bard: 
his inimitable expression cannot be rendered in any trans- 
lation, 


t 


SONNET XLV, 


It was written on the deaths of Cardinal Colonna, and of 
Laura; which explains the concett: intended in the first line 
of the original. These esteemed personages died within three 
months of each other of the plague, which so ravaged Europe 
in the year 1348. 

Sir Thomas Wyat the elder has imitated it under the title 
of: The lover laments the death of his love. 


SONNET XLVI. 


Curious, and interesting is the present Sonnet, in as much as 
it informs us of a circumstance in Petrarch’s life, less touched 
upon than any other by his biographers, namely, that, after 
the decease of his beloved Laura, he had nearly engaged in a 
new amour, which was only interrupted by the death of its fair 
object. Petrarch first saw Laura 1327. She died 1348, which 
explains the second line. 


SONNET XLVII. 


Perallel passages to the beginning of this Sonnet may be 
found in many of the ancient poets; for instance, in Horace, 


353 


Lad. 2. Od. 4. ver. 1.in Ovid, Amorum, Lib.1. Eleg. 8. ver. 49. in 
Virgil, Georg. Lib. 3. ver. 66. ‘The port he alludes to, in the | 
twelfth line, is either old-age, or the grave, both of which ex- 
tinguish the turbulent passions. And the lights, in the last 
line, may either imply hig mistress Laura, and his friend Co- 
lonna, or the eyes of Laura only. 


SONNET XLVIII. 


Written, I will presume, at Vaucluse in the year 1352. It 
is supposed to be one of those tributary compositions to 
the memory of his mistress, which, we are told, Petrarch de- 
hghted to make at the return of spring. See the note to Son- 
net IT. 


SONNET XLIX. 


This present, similar in subject to the preceding Sonnet, was 
evidently composed at Vaucluse. 


SONNET L. 


Tassoni says, this Sonnet may rank among those of the 
very first class, Fondly euthusiastick was the imagination of 
Petrarch, who fancied that his beloved friend and mistress 
visited him after death, to warn him against the evils of this 
life, and prepare him for eternity. 


SONNET LI. 


| It is hardly necessary to remark, that Aurora is alludgd to 
in the sixth line, See the note to Sonnet XXXVIL 


254 


SONNET LII. 


The last line of the original exhibits one of our bard’s favour- 
ite scriptural quotations: “ My harp also is turned to mourn- 
“* ing.” Jos, Chap. xxx. ver. 31. 


SONNET LIII. 


The present Sonnet would seem modelled after the following 
lines from Statius, Lib. 2. Sylo. 1. 


O ube purpureo suffusus sanguine candor, 
Sydereique orbes, radiataque lumina calo, 

Et castigate collecta modestia frontis, 
Ingenuique super crines, mollisque decore 

Margo come, blandis ubinam ora arguta querelis, 
Osculaque impliciti vernos redolentia flores? 


SONNET LIV. 


It is highly extolled by La Ceva, for its skilful manage- 
ment in the introduction of those objects which excite Pe- 
trarch’s envy, namely, earth, heaven, the blessed spirits above, 
and lasily death itself. 


SONNET LV. 


This Sonnet would appear to have been written near Vau- 
cluse; the spot discovering a view of the country round, and 
its different interesting objects, the vale in which Avignon was 
situate, the road to it, the river Sorga, and some adjacent hill. 


255 


SONNET LVI. 


La Ceva bestows the most enthusiastic encomium on the 
present Sonnet: the conclusion, says he, is of a celestial cast; 
ha un nonsu che di celeste. Yet he with great propriety criticises 
it, for having improperly blended the christian with the pagan 
mythology. In the beginning our poet places Laura in the 
third heaven, or sphere of Venus, according to the Platonists; 
and, in the first terzetto, he makes her speak as a christian, of 
the resurrection of the body. 


SONNET LVII. 


The three last lines of this Sonnet have undergone much 
fanciful, and far-fetched interpretation; but I believe the sim- 
ple idea Petrarch wished to express is, that the departure of 
Laura had caused all his days to become gloomy as that 
power (Death) which occasioned it. And he concludes with 
observing, that we all have from our birth our particular des- 
tinies allotted us. 


SONNET LVIII. 


The meaning intended by Petrarch in the last lines is very 
obscure. Whether he alludes to any unfortunate circumstance 
in Laura’s own family, or to the vicious manners of the inha- 
bitants of the place in general, has been doubted, Perhaps 
he may refer to something temporary, of which we can have 
no knowledge. 


256 


SONNET LIX. 


‘ 
This beautiful Sonnet, wherein Petrarch seems to have had 

an eye to the beginning of the first book of Lucretius, was 
most probably written at Vaucluse, 1353, on the same oc- 
casion with Sonnets II. XLVIII. XLIX. with some others ; 
and, as a critick observes, it seems to have been the germ of 
Metastasio’s charming description of spring : 

Gra riede primavera 

Col suo fiorito aspetto, &c. 


Love and mirth are the keys alluded to in the eleventh line, 
says Castelvetro. 

Drummond of Hawthornden, whose exquisite little poems 
are all studded over with the gems of Petrarch, has very hap- 
pily imitated, or rather played upon the present Sonnet, in 
one of his, which begins with : 


Sweet spring, thou com’st with all thy goodly train, &c. 


He never, like some of the early English poets, translated any 
piece from Petrarch entire; but rather kept him in view. 


SONNET LX. 


Evidently written in the spring, when every circumstance 
of the season brought to Petrarch’s recollection his beloved 
Laura, and the memorable sixth of April when he first 
beheld her. Virgil will here readily occur to the classic 
reader. 


oQualis populed marens Philomela sub umbrd 
Anussos queritur fetus, quos durus arator 


257 


Dbsercans nido implumes, detraxit ; at illa 
Flet noctem, ramoque sedens miserabile carmen 


Integrat, et mastis late loca questibus implet. 
Vina. Georg. 4. ver. 511. 


The last line expresses a correspondent sentiment with that 
of Sonnet I. 


Che quanto piace af mondo ¢ breve sogno. 


SONNET LXI. 


Our port here tells us, that nothing delightful either to 
sight, or hearing, and he enumerates some images perhaps the 
most grateful to those senses in himself, can henceforth afford 
pleasure, since Laura is no more. 


SONNET LXIL. 


Petrarch laments that, having arrived at an age whett 
he might have held a friendly aud unimpassioned inter- 
course with Laura, death should deprive him of such innocent 
enjoyment, by snatching her away. The decline of life our 
poet describes in tliree different metaphors, that of a plant 
ceasing to flourigh ; that of flame extinguishing itself; and 
that of an arch, meaning the arch of life, whose highest point 
may be suppused to mark about the age of forty. The fols 
lowing passage from Horace applies to our subject. 


Fuge suspicari, 
Cujus octacum trevidavit atus 
Cluudere lustrum. Z 
Hon. Od. 4. Lib, 2. 


258 


SONNET LXIII. 


It is supposed to have been written on Petrarch’s return 
from Italy to Vaucluse, when he perhaps necessarily passed 
near Laura’s birth-place, which must have occasioned him 
much tender and sorrowful reflection. Ile begins it with 
that play upon his mistress’s name, L’aura (the gale) he so 
frequently affects even in his serious strain. Love is alluded 
to in the twelfth line. 


ww 


ODE X. 


This little simple Ballad, which needs no comment, has 
however obtained the following from the ludicrous Tassom : 
“ Our poet had foolishly flattered himself, that in his old age 
“ he should sit with Laura by the fire-side, roasting chestnuts, 
“and telling her his love-stories; but le must still honour- 
“ably renin as he is, composing amorous ditties, which 


“ may possibly acquire him some small reputation.” 


SONNET LXIV. 


The metaphor assumed in the seventh line of the present 
Sonnet is scarcely translatable into our language: it would 
seem taken from Virgil, alluding to the Sybil’s leaves. 


Folus tantum ne carmina manda ; 


Ne turbata volent rapidis ludibria ventis, 
Virc. Aineid. 6. ver. 74. 


Wf the last ferzetto the sense, rather than a close transla- 
tion, is given. According to, Qastelvetro, it alludes to a re- 


259 


ceived opinion, that, in our passage to another world, we are 
assisted, and defended from the assaults of the devil, by the 
intervention of some blessed spirit, perhaps once dear to us in 
this life, and then of acknowledged sanctity. 


SONNET LXV. 


In the eighth line Petrarch seems to have a reference to 
the golden branch of Virgil’s tree. 


———— Primo avulso, non deficit alter 
Aurcus, et simili frondescit virga metallo. 
Vino. Aineid. 6. ver, 144, 


SONNET LXVI. 


This Sonnet is by some commentators denominated the 
Apotheosis of Laura. 


SONNET LXVII. 


Tassoni observes, that a number of very familiar images 
are here introduced in a new and pleasing manner. Castel- 
vetro interprets the word snelli, in the seventh line, as applied 
to feet, ‘‘ active in avoiding the snares of love :” but this is 
certainly a very far-fetched construction. I conceive the 
poet merely meant te express the beauty of Laura’s feet, by 
saying, that they were like those of her who was first created 


in paradise, meaning Eve, consequently the model « aa 
perfection. 


260 


SONNET LXVIII. 


The sentiment of tenderness, and affection, even beyond the 
grave, which prevails throughout this Sonnet, is exquisite, 
and beautiful. The third line exhibits another instance of 
our poet’s love of scriptural allusion; it has a reference to 
the 6th Chap. of St. Matnew, 20th Verse. “ Lay up for your- 
“ gelves treasures in heaven, &c.” 


SONNET LXIX. 


It is purely of a religious cast; and is one of the few 
of our poet that does not immediately point at love, and 
Laura. He repents of having so misapplied in his youth the 
talents with which he was gifted, craving pardon for the 
same, and assistance from heaven. 


SONNET LXX. 


This is the last of all Petrarch’s Sonnets, according to their 
order, Drummond of Hawthornden, has imitated it in part 
very prettily, beginning thus : 


Sweet bird, that sing’st away the early hours 
Of winters past, or coming, void of care, &c. 


TAVOLA 


De Sonetti, e Canzoni. 


I caratteri Romani mostrano 7 Canzoni. 


Paging 
Amor, che meco al buon tempo tt stavi.  . . » 194 
Amor m’ ha posto come segno a strale. ‘ - 92 
Amor, quando fioria. : ; - 208 
Anima beila, da quel nodo sciolta. : : . 196 
A pié de’ colli, ove la bella vesta. : : ‘ 8 
Apollo ; s’ ancor vive il bel desio. : , ; » 26 
A qualunque animale alberga in terra. ; - 18 
Aura, che quelle chiome bionde, e crespe. ‘ - 138 
Cercato ho sempre solitaria vita. ; . - 150 
Cesare, poi che’l traditor d’ Egitto. ; : - 72 
Che debb’ io far; che mi consigli, Amore. . 154 
Da’ pin. begli occhi, e dal pid chiaro viso- ; » 218 
Del? empia Babilonia, ond’ é fuggita. ; . - 4 


Di tempo in tempo mi si fa men dura, , ‘ \ - 98 
Dolgi ire, dolci sdegni, ¢ doli paci. : . . 124 


262 


Pagina 
Erano 1 capet d’oro all’ aura sparsi. ; : . 68 
Fiamma dal ciel su le tue treccie mova. ; . 96 
Cra fiammeggiava l’ amorosa stella. , “s . 24 
Gh angela eletti, e ’ anime beate. : : . 216 
Gli occh di ch’ 10 parlai si caldamente. . 184 


Grazie, ch’ a pochi’l ciel largo destinag  . . . 128 


Il cantar novo, e’l pianger degh augelh. . : - 130 
[1 mo avversario ; m cur veder solcte. , . 380 
In qual parte del cie?’, in quale rdea. ; ; - 104 
Ite, rime dolenti, al duro sasso. : ; s “212 
LT’ vidi in terra angelice costumt. : - 102 
I’ vo prangendo 1 miet passate temp. : ; s. eee 
La gola, e’l sonno, e 7 oziose piume. : , . 6 
L’ ardente nodo, ov io fui d ora in ora. ; - 172 
Lasciato hai, Morte, senza sole wt mondo. ‘ . 214 
Lassafe il velo o per sole, o per ombra. . - » 10 
Lasso, ch’ v ardo, ed altri non me’l crede. : «122 
La vita fugge, e non sarresta un’ ora. . 174 
I? aura gentil, che rasserena 1 poggt. . 114 
LT’ aura serena, che fra verdi fronde. E » 116 
L* aura soave, ch’ al sol spiega, e trbra. . - 118 
Levommi il mio pensier’ tn parte, ov’ era. , - 192 
Lieti fiort, c felict, e ben nate erbe. ; ; . 106 
Mille fiate, o dolce mia guerrera. : ; . 16 
Nella stagion che 1 ciel rapido inchina. ; » 34 
Ne niai pietosa madre al caro figlio. : : - 180 


Ne per fereno cil’ ir vaghe stelle. ; . - 202 
Non d’ atra, e tempestosa onda marina, , . - 100 


268 


: Pagina 
Non ha tanti animali il mar fraPonde,  . . . 140 
O bella man, che mi distringi ’l core. ; : ~ 120 
Oime il bel ciso; oimé tb soace sguardo. ; . 152 
Oade tolse Amor I’ oro, e dé qual vena. . : . 132 
Or’ é la frontc, che con pecciol cenno. . 186 
Pace non trovo, ¢ non hoda far guerra. . ; ~ 94 
Perché la vita ¢ breve. . ; . - 90 
Perch® quel che mi trasse ad amar prima... . 46 
Perch’ io t abbia guardato di menzogna. ‘ : . 82 
Per far una leggiadra sua vendetta, : ; . A 
Piaitic donne, econ vot panga Amore. . : . 70 
Pit volte gid dal bel sembiante umano. . 108 
Pod, ben puo tu portartene la scorza. ‘ ; . 110 
Qual paura ho, quando mitorna a mente. —. . 148 
Quand’ w veggio dal ciel scender I’ Aurora. ; » 182 
Quando giunse a Simon alto concetto. . 66 
Quando ’t sol bagna in mar U aurato carro. ; - 134 
Quanta incidia tt porto, acara terra. : . 188 
Quante fate al mo dolce ricetto. ; ‘ . 178 
Quel ros:gniuol, che st soave pragne. : . 200 
Quel cago inpallidir, che ?l dolce riso, ‘ . 76 
Rapido fiume, che @’ alpestra vena. : ; ~ 126 
Rotta ¢ U alta Colonna, e’l verde Lauro. - 170 
Se lamentar augelli, o verdi fronde. : : » 176 
Se da mia vita dall’ aspro tormento. : ; « 12 
Se ‘] pensier che mi strugze. , : ~ 78 
Sento l aura mia antica; eidolci colli. . ‘4 ~ 206 
Solo, e pensoso i pits descrti ca, pr. ; : . 28 


Steamo, Amor,aveder la gloria nostra, : 112 


264 


5S’ una fede amorosa, un cor non finto. 
Tutta la mia fiorita, e verde etade. 


Vago augelletto, che cantando vat. 
Valle, che de’ lamenti met se piena. 
Vergognando talor, ch’ ancor si toccta. 
Vor ch’ ascoltate in rime sparse 11 suono. 
Volo con I’ ali de’ pensiert al cielo. 


Zcfiro torna, ¢'l bel tempo rimena. 


Pagina 

‘ © 136 
e ~ 204 

; - 224 

i - 190 

14 

. ‘ 2 

° e 220 

° ; - 198 


TABLE 
Of the Sonnets, and OvEs. 


The Italick characters denote the Odes. 


Ah me, that lovely look! that beauteous face. 
Alas, with ardour past belief I glow. 

All solitary, lost in thought, I stray 
Although from falsehood I did thee restrain. 
Asham’d sometimes thy beauties should remain. 
A thousand times, sweet warriour, to obtain. 


Beneath those very hills, where beauty threw. 
Bright spirit, from those earthly bonds releas’d. 


Count the ocean’s finny droves. 


Each creature, on whose wakeful eyes. 


é 


Fall’n that proud Column, fall’n that Laurel tree. \ 
For many a crime at once to make me smart. 
From time to time less cruelty I trace. 


Page 
153 
123 
29 
33 
14 
17 


197 
14] 
19 


171 


99 


266 


Gay joyous blooms, and herbage glad with show’rs. 


Go, plaintive verse, to the dull marble go. 
Graces, that lib’ral heav’n on few bestows. 


Here tarry, Love, our glory to behold. 
Her golden tresses on the wind she threw. 
low often to my sweet retreat 1 haste. 


I feel the well-known gale; the hills I spy. 

Hf faith impassion’d, and a heart sincere. 

If in sweet accent moans the plaintive bird. 
Impetuous flood, that from the Alps’ rude head. 
Intemp’rance, slumber, and the slothful down. 


Life flies apace, and tarries not an hour. : 
Love makes me as the target for his dart. ; 


May fire from heav’n rain down upon thy head. 
My fancy bore me to that region, where. ‘ 
My life, sweet lady, could I] but maintain. : 
My rival, in whose face you're wont to view. 
My verdurous, and bloomy prime was past. 


Ne’er did fond mother to her darling son. 
Nor beamy stats that climb the blue serene. 
No wearied mariner to port e’er fled. 


O beauteous hand, that dost my heart subdue. 
Oft as her angel face compassion wore. 

O Phebus, if that fond desire remains. 

O that my cheeks were taught. . 
O ye, whglist in scatter’d verse the sound. ; 


Say from what part of heav’n ’twas Nature drew. 
Since human life ts frail. ‘ 


Page 
107 
213 
129 


113 
69 
179 


207 
137 
177 
127 


175 
93 


193 


181 
203 
101 


121 
109 


967 


Page 
So often on the wings of thought I fly. : » 221 
Still do I weep the days that are gone by. . : » 228 
Still have I sought a life of solitude. ‘ - 251 
Sweet bird, that singest on thy airy way. ; 5. 225 
Sweet scorn, sweet anger, and sweet misery. . “ 4126 


That burning toil, in which I once was caught. . «173 


The birds’ sweet wail, their renovated song. . » 13i 
The brightest eyes, the most resplendent face. . . 219 
The chosen angels, and the spirits blest. . « 217 
The gale, that o’er yon hills flings softer blue. . - 115 
The gentle gale, that plays my face around. =. e. ET 
The pallid tint of loveliness, which threw. ‘ “ (FF 
The pleasant gale, that to the sun unplaits. . » 119 
Those eyes, of which my song so warmly told. . 185 
Thou, Death, has left this world’s dark, cheerless way. 215 
Thou gale, that movest, and disportest round, : » 139 
Though cruelty denies my view. : : - AF 
Thou Love, who these soul-friending banks beside. » 195 
Thou Po to distant realms this frame may >t bear. - (iil 
Thou vale, that with my plaimings dost resound. . . 191 
Throughout the orient now began to flame. : 2% 25 
Warfare I cannot wage, yet know not peace. : » 95 
Weep beauteous damsels, and let Cupid weep. . . 71 
What dread I feel, when | revolve the day. ‘ » 149 


What envy do I bear thee, greedy clay. . - 189 
What should I do; what, Love, dost thou advise. » 155 
What time towards the western skies. ; . . 3d 
Whence could Love take the gold, and from what vein. 133 
When Egypt’s traitor Pompey’s honour’d head. \ - 43 
When from the heav’ns I see Aurora beam. : » 183 
When Simon at my wish the proud design. - 67 


£68 


Pagt 
When sinks in ocean the sun’s golden wain. - 135 
Wherefore, my unkind fair-one, say. ee ee a | 
Where is that countenance, whose slightest sign, +» 187 
Yes, I beheld on earth angelick grace. - 3 « 108 
Yes, Love, at that propitious time. ' ; ‘ ~ 209 
Yes, out of impious Babylon I’m flown, : ‘ ~ G5 


Yon mghtingale that pours forth tuneful wail. 5 . 202 


k 


dephyr returns; and in his jocund train. , » 199 
THE END. 
